Coronavirus evacuation flight to Canada leaves some family members stranded

As an airplane chartered by the Canadian government departs central China on Thursday, hundreds of evacuees will breathe a sigh of relief as they leave Wuhan, the center of the coronavirus outbreak. 
But others with close ties to Canada will remain trapped in the quarantined city: the evacuation flight is only open to Canadian passport holders. Permanent residents and Chinese citizens are not eligible for a seat, unless they are the primary caregiver of a child on the flight manifest.
Quick guide What are coronavirus symptoms and should I go to a doctor?  
 Show 
 Hide  


What is Covid-19?

It is caused by a member of the coronavirus family that has never been encountered before. Like other coronaviruses, it has come from animals.



What are the symptoms this coronavirus causes?

The virus can cause pneumonia-like symptoms. Those who have fallen ill are reported to suffer coughs, fever and breathing difficulties.
In the UK, the National Heath Service has defined the symptoms as:
a high temperature - you feel hot to touch on your chest or back
a new continuous cough - this means you've started coughing repeatedly



Should I go to the doctor if I have a cough?

Medical advice varies around the world - with many countries imposing travel bans and lockdowns to try and prevent the spread of the virus. In many place people are being told to stay at home rather than visit a doctor of hospital in person. Check with your local authorities.
In the UK, NHS advice is that anyone with symptoms should stay at home for at least 7 days. If you live with other people, they should stay at home for at least 14 days, to avoid spreading the infection outside the home.



Is the virus being transmitted from one person to another?

Yes. China’s national health commission confirmed human-to-human transmission in January.



How many people have been affected?

China’s national health commission confirmed human-to-human transmission in January. As of 19 March, more than 219,000 people have been infected in more than 150 countries, according to the Johns Hopkins University Center for Systems Science and Engineering.
There have been over 8,900 deaths globally. Just over 3,200 of those deaths have occurred in mainland China. Many of those who have died had underlying health conditions, which the coronavirus complicated.
More than 84,000 people are recorded as having recovered from the coronavirus.




Was this helpful?







Thank you for your feedback.

Among those stranded are Canadian permanent residents Danni Luo and her eight-year-old daughter Qinlin Li, who travelled to Wuhan on 19 January to celebrate Chinese lunar new year with family.
“They’re not on that airplane. And I have no indication from the Canadian government that they will be on any airplane ever,” said Luo’s husband Monte Gisborne, speaking from the family home in Coquitlam, British Columbia.


 
 

 
 Facebook 
 
 Twitter 
 
 Pinterest 


 Monte Gisborne, Danni Luo and Qinlin Li in happier times. Photograph: Handout
Gisborne said he feared the virus was “closing in” on his family.
“Their neighbours are dying. My wife’s mother’s best friend has died of the coronavirus,” he said. “There are reported infections in the buildings around them. It’s like everything is closing in on them.”
Canada will send a second flight to help those unable to board the first plane on 10 February, and the United States has also offered seats on an evacuation flight later on Thursday. But it remained unclear if the offers will be open to non-citizens.
Luo and Li initially planned to return home on 15 February. But as news of the virus spread and panic seized the city, Luo changed their tickets to 28 January as a precautionary measure.
Days later, however, Chinese authorities shut down transportation to and from the city, rendering the tickets useless.
Gisborne said he had struggled to get answers from Canadian officials as he waits for his wife and daughter to return. “I’m so frustrated. I’m so fed up with this lack of communication, lack of planning, lack of direction.”
Wayne Duplessis and Emily Tjandra, who work as teachers in Wuhan, initially welcomed news an aircraft would be taking Canadians out of the locked-down city.
But they soon realized an evacuation would separate their family. Duplessis and his 15-year-old son Wyatt are Canadian citizens; Emily and her older son Adryan, 38, are not.
As they weighed their options, Duplessis said that advice from Canadian officials often arrived too late to be of use.
“By the time I got the most recent details about the evacuation flight, people were already at the airport,” he said. “I don’t mean to be judgmental … but there are people here that need help – and they need some clear answers.”



Paranoia and frustration as China places itself under house arrest







Read more





With roads shut down and no private cars or taxis on the road, just reaching the airport is a logistical challenge, he said.
Further complicating matters is that Adryan, also a teacher, is trapped on the other side of the city at one of the school’s campuses.
Because of the uncertainty, Duplessis and his wife have decided to stay in Wuhan.
The family is “relatively comfortable”, with access to food and water in the high-rise apartment, he said. 
“Normally, there’s just so much humanity here. It’s wonderful,” he said. “But you’re not seeing that any more. It’s empty. The only reminder there are even people around you is at night, when their lights are turned on.”


Topics



Canada






Coronavirus outbreak




China




Americas




Asia Pacific




news






Share on Facebook






Share on Twitter






Share via Email






Share on LinkedIn






Share on Pinterest






Share on WhatsApp






Share on Messenger








Reuse this content




 