US confirms two more coronavirus cases, bringing total to five

America’s fourth and fifth cases of coronavirus were confirmed on Sunday after health officials in California and Arizona announced that they were each treating a patient infected with the deadly illness.
Los Angeles County Department of Public Health said the patient is a “returning traveller” from Wuhan City – the epicentre of the outbreak in Hubei Province, China – who sought medical attention when they realised they were unwell.
Health officials said the infected person is being treated in hospital, but to protect patient privacy declined to name the hospital location.
The virus has so far infected over 2,000 people globally and killed 56 people in China. At least 20 Chinese cities have been placed on lockdown in a bid to prevent its spread and cities across Hubei province are under travel restrictions.
The LA case marked the first in Los Angeles county and the fourth case in the US. Another three had previously been reported in Orange county, California, Illinois and Washington state. Then later on Sunday the fifth known case in the US was confirmed in Arizona, though fewer details were immediately available.



Coronavirus's ability to spread getting stronger, China suggests







Read more





Health officials in LA county said they are working to identify people who may have had close contact with the person – including friends, family members and health care professionals – so that they can be monitored for signs of illness.
Barbara Ferrer, Director of Los Angeles County Department of Public Health, said they are “well prepared” to deal with cases and suspected cases.
“We are working closely with our federal, state and local partners to provide healthcare providers and the public with accurate information about actions we are taking to reduce the spread of novel coronavirus and to care for those who are ill,” she added.
“As with other respiratory illnesses, there are steps that everyone can take to reduce the risk of getting sick from circulating viruses, including coronavirus. This includes remaining home when ill, washing hands with soap and water frequently, and getting vaccinated against flu.”
She said they are daily learning more about the virus, how it is transmitted and incubation periods, but that the risk of transmission in the county “remains low”.
It comes after the US State Department said on Sunday that it plans to evacuate staff from its Wuhan consulate and will offer some US citizens flights out of the city. Some private US citizens will be allowed to board a “single flight” leaving the city on Tuesday for San Francisco.
Tedros Adhanom Ghebreyesus, director-general of the World Health Organisation, said on Sunday that he was on his way to Beijing to meet with the Chinese government and health experts working on the response to the virus.
“My WHO colleagues and I would like to understand the latest developments and strengthen our partnership with China in providing further protection against the outbreak,” he wrote on Twitter.


Topics



Coronavirus outbreak






China




Asia Pacific




California




Arizona




news






Share on Facebook






Share on Twitter






Share via Email






Share on LinkedIn






Share on Pinterest






Share on WhatsApp






Share on Messenger








Reuse this content




 