UK pension funds lose 5% of their value in coronavirus scare

British pension funds have lost 5%-6% of their value in the last five days as fears over the impact of coronavirus sent stock markets tumbling around the world.
Until a week ago, employees who were about to retire were looking at their pension statements with some confidence after share prices had hit record highs around the world. Shares in the US tech stocks, in which many UK pension funds are invested, had seemingly been on an ever-upward trajectory.
However, after a week in which global stock markets plunged and predictions that the outbreak could match the financial crash of 2008, imminent retirees are facing a far less certain future, than even a week ago.
Someone in their early 60s with a typical pension pot of around £250,000 has seen its value fall by around £13,000 in the last five days. Wealthier workers who have accumulated a £1m pot are facing a £50,000-plus loss.
Pension funds typically have 60%-70% of their investments in stock markets with the rest held in bonds, property, cash and other investments.
This week’s 11% fall in the value of shares in London and an 8% fall in New York and other markets around the world, have resulted in the equivalent loss of value to pension funds.
Investment firm Hargreaves Lansdown said over the first four days of this week one of the UK’s most popular funds managed by Scottish Widows was down more than 4%.
Employees logging into Legal & General’s default pension scheme on Friday were looking at a 4.6% fall in their fund’s value. Another popular fund, Vanguard’s LifeStrategy 60% Equity Fund, was similarly down 4.8%, compared with just a week ago.
Pension funds can take several days to revalue following big share price shifts.
Nest, the government appointed body that runs the auto-enrollment scheme for its 8 million members, said its main fund was down 3.3% as of Wednesday night.
Nathan Long, a senior analyst at Hargreaves Lansdown, said: “Coronavirus may have brought some short-term jitters in the stock market, but pension savers shouldn’t be worried. It’s important to look past short-term fluctuations when saving for long-term targets like retirement. Default pension investments have seen falls this week, but the story over five years looks far rosier.”
Mark Fawcett, Nest’s chief investment officer said: “Pension saving is a long game – people can be saving for up to 40 or even 50 years, so it’s important to keep looking at the bigger picture, rather than short-term events. Younger savers should comfortably ride out short-term fluctuations and at Nest we take steps to protect members’ pots as they get closer to retirement and are more likely to need their money sooner.”
This week’s stock market turmoil will have had the largest impact on those about to retire, on the money they have put away. Workers lucky enough to still have a final salary pension scheme – typically those who work in the public sector – will be unaffected by this week’s price falls.
After the financial crash of 2008 many 65-year-olds were forced to delay their retirement after seeing their retirement pots decimated by stock market falls. It took five years for share prices to return to their pre-financial crash levels.
• Sign up to the daily Business Today email here or follow Guardian Business on Twitter at @BusinessDesk


Topics



Pensions industry






Pensions




Coronavirus outbreak




news






Share on Facebook






Share on Twitter






Share via Email






Share on LinkedIn






Share on Pinterest






Share on WhatsApp






Share on Messenger








Reuse this content




 