Australian shares fall 7.36% on Morrison's coronavirus stimulus and Trump's travel ban

Panic selling drove Australian shares down 7.36% on Thursday after the market gave the thumbs down to a government stimulus package before being electrified by a sweeping US ban on European travel imposed by Donald Trump.
More than 25% of the market’s value, or more than $520bn, has been wiped from the value of Australian shares since 21 February, when coronavirus chaos began to grip the market.
Thursday’s steep fall – the second of more than 7% this week and the worst single-day plunge since the global financial crisis – once again battered airlines, travel agents and mining stocks, but no sector of the economy was immune to the punishment.



Six million low-income earners to receive $750 cash under Coalition's coronavirus stimulus







Read more





Trump’s announcement is likely to further devastate already ravaged US and European markets overnight, setting the Australian exchange up for a further fall on Friday that will bring to an end one of the most miserable weeks of trade in a decade.
Just two stocks in the Australian top 200 finished up for the day: medical imaging company Pro Medicus, which bounced back from a fall of more than 7% on Wednesday, and construction contractor Cimic, formerly known as Leighton Holdings.
The benchmark ASX200 index began the day down about 2%, and began sliding further as the prime minister, Scott Morrison, and treasurer, Josh Frydenberg, began outlining a $17.6bn stimulus package that focused on helping businesses get through the crisis and had relatively little in it for households.
By the time the pair finished speaking, the index had fallen 3%.
Asked on ABC TV if he was expecting a better reaction to the announcement, the finance minister, Mathias Cormann, said there was a lot of “uncertainty” in the market.
“The market’s volatility is not unexpected in the circumstances,” he said.
“The fundamentals of the Australian economy are strong as we go into this and we are confident they will be strong on the other side of this.”
Panic selling set in at about 1pm, as traders began to understand the potentially devastating consequences for the world economy of Trump’s ban on travel to the US from Europe (except the UK) began to sink in.
The index immediately plummeted to be down 7% for the day.
Prices fluctuated wildly over three manic hours of trade but any hope some of the losses could be clawed back were dashed when buying support evaporated at the closing bell, leaving the index down 7.36% for the day.
Lithium and tantalum miner Pilbara Minerals was the worst performer in the top 200, shedding one fifth of its value – a fall that came on top of a 13% fall on Wednesday.
As a whole, mining stocks are down about 40% over the past month.



'Rudd mark II': what experts say about Australian government's $17.6bn stimulus package







Read more





Online air ticket sales company Webjet, which on Wednesday withdrew its profit forecasts because of the coronavirus pandemic, was not far behind Pilbara Mining, crashing 19.7%, while travel agency network Flight Centre was the third biggest loser, diving 18.2%.
Both companies have lost about half of their market value since 20 February.
Other stocks to have more than 15% of their value ripped away included troubled financial services group IOOF, down 15.8%, and Sydney casino operator Star, which fell 15.4%. Star’s rival, James Packer’s Crown Resorts, fell 8%.
Webjet is not the only company struggling to grasp the damage wrought by the Covid-19 outbreak.
Building supplies company Brickworks told the market its profit for the first half of the year would be down 50% compared to the same time last year while Wilson Asset Management scrapped a share offering for investors in its listed WAM Active fund.
New Zealand’s Auckland Airport, which is listed on the Australian exchange, went into a trading halt, saying it needed time to consider the effects of Trump’s announcement on its business.


Topics



Business






Coronavirus outbreak




Australian economy




Infectious diseases




news






Share on Facebook






Share on Twitter






Share via Email






Share on LinkedIn






Share on Pinterest






Share on WhatsApp






Share on Messenger








Reuse this content




 