‘Everything is up in the air’: coronavirus fears upend US election campaigns

The coronavirus outbreak threatens to upend the organisation of the US presidential election and strike a blow to Donald Trump because of his reliance on big campaign rallies.
Democratic rivals Joe Biden and Bernie Sanders both cancelled rallies in Cleveland, Ohio, on Tuesday, citing recommendations from public health officials to avoid assembling large indoor crowds. Sunday’s televised debate between the men in Phoenix, Arizona, will take place without a studio audience or media “spin room”.
That did not stop the Trump campaign announcing a “Catholics for Trump” coalition launch in Milwaukee, Wisconsin, on Thursday next week, where the president is expected to address thousands of supporters as if it were business as usual.
“While public health experts caution us against large gatherings, the commander-in-chief schedules a rally,” tweeted David Axelrod, former chief strategist for Barack Obama. “What message does that send?”



Election officials rush to make changes to address coronavirus concerns







Read more





But as coronavirus worsens, with more than 1,000 cases now reported in the US, Trump could face overwhelming pressure to scale down or scrap his regular rallies, a move that is likely to hurt him more than Biden, his probable opponent in the November election.
Rallies are the lifeblood of Trump’s political identity. He held them in crucial places that rival Hillary Clinton failed to visit in 2016. He has staged nearly a hundred of them since becoming president. He appears more at ease firing up a raucous crowd than in the staid formality of Washington.
No less importantly, the rallies have become an integral part of Trump campaign’s data gathering operation. The Politico website noted this week: “Nearly 31,000 people signed up to attend Donald Trump’s recent campaign rally in North Charleston, South Carolina. It didn’t matter that less than half of them showed up.
“The Trump campaign kept every one of their names and plans to spend the next eight months urging them to help the president’s re-election efforts – knocking on doors, donating a few dollars, attending a meetup and, most importantly, voting on election day.”
In total, Politico added, the Trump campaign has identified more than 1.4 million potential voters from their events since inauguration day 2017, including about 126,000 who did not vote in the last four elections.
Cancelling rallies could therefore cut off this crucial data supply. Among those who fear the political consequences is the rightwing radio talkshow host Rush Limbaugh, who this week pushed a conspiracy theory that Democrats want to stop the rallies because some of their own members have been attending them.
“This is why they want these rallies stopped,” he said. “This is why – it’s not because of public safety, not because of public health. These people – because as you point out, they’re not making an effort to shut down every other opportunity for people to congregate.”
He added: “It makes perfect sense from their standpoint. If you can’t beat Trump and if you want to stop the appearance of excitement about the Trump campaign, then stop the rallies. And if you’re really worried that so many people attending rallies are actually Democrats, then you’ve really gotta shut ’em down.”
The 2020 presidential election has already been buffeted by unexpected events. Senators who had planned to campaign in Iowa and New Hampshire found themselves spending the day at Trump’s impeachment trial. But the coronavirus promises disruption on a grander scale for campaigns and voters.
The MSNBC network host Chris Hayes said on Tuesday: “You think people are going to be going to the polls in Georgia in two weeks? In big public gatherings? That’s an open question right now.” Fellow presenter Nicolle Wallace wondered: “Will there be conventions? Will there be debates? What will voting look like? Everything is up in the air.”
The “Catholics for Trump” event appears to be a test of whether the public will accept campaign events. Asked at a White House briefing on Tuesday whether the Trump campaign would continue to hold rallies, Vice-President Mike Pence said: “That’ll be a decision that’s made literally on a day-to-day basis.”
Biden’s campaign, meanwhile, cancelled a get-out-the-vote event planned for Thursday in Florida, which will hold primary contests next week along with Arizona, Illinois and Ohio. The former vice-president plans instead to deliver an address in his hometown of Wilmington, Delaware, on Thursday regarding the US coronavirus response.
This could give him an opportunity to appear presidential while, critics say, Trump flounders. Rallies and other public events, meanwhile, are not seen as Biden’s strongpoint, so cancelling those may shield him from scrutiny and the risk of making gaffes.
But analysts in Washington played down the significance of rallies to final election outcome. Elaine Kamarck, a senior fellow in the governance studies programme at the Brookings Institution thinktank, said: “I just don’t think this will matter one way or another. It’s true believers that go to Trump rallies and they’re not going to desert him.
“We are talking about an electorate of 100 million or more. Whether you have 5,000 or 10,000 people at a rally makes no difference. There are probably 10 people in the United States who don’t know what they think of Trump and they’re so out of it they might not even bother to vote.”
John Zogby, a Democratic pollster, acknowledged: “The campaign rallies have been very important to him and he always scheduled them strategically. They give him a boost. He’s a showman and this is Trump at his best.”
But he added: “He has other effective ways of communicating and he will use them. His support base will move along with these changes. The campaign are very sophisticated in their use of data and being able to adjust.”


Topics







US elections 2020






Coronavirus outbreak




Donald Trump




Joe Biden




Bernie Sanders




Democrats




news






Share on Facebook






Share on Twitter






Share via Email






Share on LinkedIn






Share on Pinterest






Share on WhatsApp






Share on Messenger








Reuse this content




 