Coronavirus: UK headteachers told to stay calm and keep schools open

Schools and nurseries do not need to close or send pupils home in the event of contact with someone suspected of having the coronavirus, according to new guidelines to be issued to schools across the UK this week.
In the face of confusion over what the correct response should be, Public Health England and the Department for Education are to issue headteachers and childcare providers with fresh guidance on Monday .
Some schools in Brighton and Hove have told parents they can choose to keep their children off school as “authorised absences”, after five people from the area were diagnosed with the virus, also known as Covid-19.
But a department spokeswoman said: “We are aware that some schools have said that parents can keep their children at home – this is not the advice. For those who are in contact with a suspected case in a childcare or educational setting, no restrictions or special control measures are required while laboratory test results for Covid-19 are awaited.
“There is no need to close the setting or send other learners or staff home. Therefore, until the outcome of test results is known, there is no action that staff members need to take. People who test negative for Covid-19 will be advised individually about their return to education.”
She said it was helpful for schools to approach the virus like any other infectious disease. “Therefore, it is not advised that the whole school is notified that an individual is undergoing testing. Rather, communications to contacts would be circulated if a case is confirmed,” she added.
So far, 3,000 people have been tested for the disease in the UK and there have been nine confirmed cases.
If a child is suspected of having contracted the disease, it is their parents’ responsibility to inform the school that the child is staying off in order to get tested or because the child needs to self-isolate, the spokeswoman added.
The local health protection team would only inform the school directly when a child is confirmed to have the virus. “If a case is confirmed, then the local health protection team would speak to the headteacher and action would be taken from there,” she said.
Schools affected by coronavirus outbreaks in their area have been given bespoke advice by the authorities.
At some schools in Brighton and Hove, the majority of parents are choosing to keep their children at home, after receiving letters from headteachers warning that someone connected with their schools had been asked to undergo testing or had self-isolated due to the coronavirus. They are being told that such absences will be authorised by the school, an unusual step that the fresh guidance makes clear is not necessary.
Nick Brook, the deputy general secretary of NAHT, the school leaders’ union, said: “Our best advice to school leaders is to encourage them to stay on top of the continually updated advice from the government, share it with pupils and their families, and act accordingly.
“We have been signposting this advice to members. Schools will be particularly mindful to take care of the emotional needs of international students who are unable to travel home during the half-term break.”
Geoff Barton, the general secretary of the Association of School and College Leaders, said: “The advice and guidance which has been issued is sensible and proportionate. However, this is a rapidly developing situation and there may be a need for more detailed guidance if the incidence of coronavirus escalates. We are monitoring the situation closely and will respond accordingly.
“School and college leaders are highly experienced in dealing with difficult and challenging situations and are best placed to make detailed decisions over specific circumstances which may arise. We would reassure the public that the safety and wellbeing of children is their number one priority.”


Topics



Coronavirus outbreak




The Observer






Schools




Infectious diseases




news






Share on Facebook






Share on Twitter






Share via Email






Share on LinkedIn






Share on Pinterest






Share on WhatsApp






Share on Messenger








Reuse this content




 