Coronavirus latest: 20 March at a glance

Key developments in the global coronavirus outbreak today include:
Worldwide death toll passes 10,000
There have been more than 10,000 deaths from Covid-19 around the world, roughly two-thirds of which have occurred in China and Italy, and more than 240,000 cases of the virus have been confirmed. There have been 205 deaths in the US, 144 in the UK and seven in Australia, as a result of the outbreak.
Governor of California shuts down state
The governor of California has ordered all citizens to stay at home as he escalated the attempts of America’s most populous state to combat Covid-19. Gavin Newsom earlier wrote to Donald Trump to warn that 25.5 million people in the state could contract the virus – roughly 56% of the population.
Better day for markets but gloom ahead
Stock markets in Asia are have enjoyed a better day and oil prices have risen, helped by massive state intervention around the world. The Bank of England has cut rates to 0.1%, US Republicans propose giving each American $1,200 and Europe is rolling out packages worth 1.7 trillion euros. But some investors believe a new credit crunch will create a wave of defaults in the corporate world that could dwarf the 2008 global financial crisis.
Thousands told to self-isolate after leaving Sydney cruise ship
About 2,700 cruise ship passengers have been told to self-isolate after three people tested positive onboard the Ruby Princess. The doctor onboard the ship had conducted 13 tests. The vessel is docked in Sydney after a relatively short cruise to New Zealand.
Death toll in Italy overtakes China
The number of deaths in Italy has passed the total in China to make it the worst-affected country in the world with 3,405 fatalities. Southern and central Italy are braced for a “tsunami” of cases.
Researchers at Oxford University racing to make vaccine available by end of year
Researchers at Oxford University are racing to develop a UK vaccine against coronavirus with the hope of making it available by the end of the year, as British PM Boris Johnson told his daily media conference that the country could “turn the tide” on the virus in 12 weeks.
More lockdowns and border closures
Argentina has gone into lockdown, Haiti has closed its borders and Chile has postponed a constitutional referendum.
Trump cancels G7 meeting at Camp David
Trump has cancelled the G7 meeting at Camp David. It will now be carried out by teleconference.


Topics



Coronavirus outbreak




Coronavirus: at a glance






news






Share on Facebook






Share on Twitter






Share via Email






Share on LinkedIn






Share on Pinterest






Share on WhatsApp






Share on Messenger








Reuse this content




 