Australian government urged to quickly pump billions into economy amid coronavirus crisis

Economists have called for the Australian government to quickly pump billions into the Australian economy after the announcement of a rescue package for the US by Donald Trump delivered markets from a repeat of Monday’s coronavirus carnage.
In a rollercoaster trading session, the benchmark ASX200 opened down 3.7% and was shaping up for a second day of big losses after overseas markets plunged overnight.
But Trump’s promise of “dramatic” measures to boost the US economy, delivered shortly after the Australian market opened, sent stocks soaring.
Traders ignored poor business conditions and sentiment data released by NAB, as well as Qantas’s decision to ground almost a quarter of its international fleet, driving the ASX200 to close up 3.1% for the day.



Coronavirus has so far cost average the Australian superannuation balance $5,900, data shows







Read more





Economists surveyed by Guardian Australia on Tuesday said the government needed to move fast to support small and medium-sized businesses that have been smashed by the Covid-19 outbreak, but differed on whether now was the right time to hand out cash to households, as the Rudd government did in 2009 to stave off the effects of the global financial crisis.
As the virus has spread, economists have increased their estimates of how much damage it will do to the global economy and the likelihood that a recession will put an end to Australia’s 29-year run of uninterrupted growth.
Economists have also warned that the damage to an Australian economy already battered by bushfires, drought and persistently low wages growth is likely to continue all year.
“Many people had hoped we were going to see the coronavirus crisis dealt with in the same manner as Sars [in 2002], that is in and out in two quarters,” the KPMG chief economist, Brendan Rynne, said. “That’s wishful thinking.”
The NAB chief economist, Alan Oster, said a package of $10bn, as widely reported, would be inadequate.
“I think you need more than $10bn,” he said. “You’re trying to get cashflow into the SMEs and into households.”
He said the government should allow small businesses to delay payment of company and goods and services taxes by three months in order to prop up their cashflow during the crisis.
Newstart should be increased – something the social services minister, Anne Ruston, has ruled out – or low-income earner wages topped up by government subsidy, he said. “If it is targeted at the bottom end, they will spend it,” he said.
He said the government should also consider bringing forward infrastructure maintenance spending.
The market uncertainty comes as the Morrison government finalises a coronavirus stimulus package aimed at averting a recession, amid warnings that the economic fallout from the disease could be worse than the global financial crisis.
The package, likely to be announced on Thursday, is expected to include a new business investment allowance, a financial boost for pensioners through changes to deeming rates, support for small and medium-sized businesses and a tax break for households.
On Tuesday, Morrison said that any measures put in place would be temporary, and accompanied by a “fiscal exit strategy” to ensure that the budget would bounce back once the crisis passed.
Facing calls from unions to ensure casual workers were shielded from the potential disruption, Morrison also called on businesses to “hold on to your people” as part of a collective national effort to deal with the outbreak.
On Tuesday, the industrial relations minister, Christian Porter, met with unions and employer groups, but said the government would not “jump to a solution” to address a workforce issue that had not yet arisen.
Labor’s shadow treasurer, Jim Chalmers, called on the government’s stimulus package to include “substantial” measures that would address consumer and business confidence, and “proper support” for casual workers who did not have access to sick leave.
All six senior economists Guardian Australia spoke to on Tuesday agreed that allowing small and medium-sized businesses to put off tax payments was a good idea, but opinions varied on whether Newstart should be raised or cash handed out to workers.
Sarah Hunter, the chief economist at BIS Oxford Economics, said the government could also make interest-free loans to businesses to tide them over.
She said the government should support self-employed people and casuals whose work dried up as a result of the coronavirus outbreak. Raising the Newstart rate was “an effective way of government spending”, she said.
The independent economist Saul Eslake endorsed allowing business to delay tax payments but said allowing companies instant tax write-offs for investments might not work given they are already reluctant to spend.
“While that could assist in speeding the recovery when it comes, I’m not sure it will assist in the immediate downturn,” he said. “The same could be said for tax cuts.”
He suggested “payments to people forced to self-isolate who don’t have access to sick leave provisions”.
“If they want to lift the Newstart allowance I’m not going to begrudge that,” he said. “But the risk if you give people cash is they don’t spend it.”
He said people spent the $900 handed out by the Rudd government during the GFC but times had changed. “I think people are more cautious now.”
He urged the government to think big, saying any stimulus would always be either too much or too little. “If it does turn out to be too much you can always stop it or even wind it back,” he said.
The Industry Super Australia chief economist, Stephen Anthony, said the package needed to be timely and targeted.
“Anything that revolves around payments of obligations to government that can be deferred, that can be paid in instalments,” he said.
He said the ATO tracked the cashflow of small, medium and big businesses. “It should be pretty easy for businesses to show there’s been a cashflow hit,” he said.
KPMG’s Rynne said the government should help businesses pay workers who were off sick with the virus. He said the time was not yet right for cash handouts because the damage was so far mostly to supply of goods, not demand from consumers.



Morrison warns coronavirus hit could be worse than GFC amid recession predictions







Read more





“When it evolves into a demand side [problem] it will be worth working out if there is anything more or different that can be done for confidence,” he said.
Tuesday’s surge was only the third day the Australian market has finished in the black since 21 February, when traders began a virus-inspired selling spree.
Qantas finished the day up 7.2% on Tuesday – a dramatic turnaround from a fall of more than 10% on Monday – but not all stocks shared in the bourse’s buoyancy.
Real estate trusts and utilities finished the day down. Sydney Airport fell 0.6% and was set for a further drop on Wednesday, revealing after trade closed that passenger numbers were down 9.3% in February compared to the same period in 2019.
“For the first nine days of March, the provisional data indicates a 25% decrease in international passenger traffic and a 6% decrease in domestic passenger traffic,” the company told the ASX.


Topics



Coronavirus outbreak






Business




Australian economy




Coalition




Labor party




Scott Morrison




Christian Porter




news






Share on Facebook






Share on Twitter






Share via Email






Share on LinkedIn






Share on Pinterest






Share on WhatsApp






Share on Messenger








Reuse this content




 