‘Outlier’ victim profiles raise questions over the impact of coronavirus

Most people who died from the new coronavirus appear to have been old, and many had pre-existing health problems, but Chinese government records list at least five victims under 60, with no prior medical issues detailed.
These potential “outliers” – aged 36, 50, 53, 55 and 58 – are a reminder that scientists are still racing to understand the nature and impact of the new disease as it spreads in China and around the world.
The virus is far less deadly than severe acute respiratory syndrome (Sars), another coronavirus-caused respiratory disease, which emerged in China in 2002. Nearly one in 10 people infected with Sars died, while the epidemic in Wuhan has so far killed about 2% of those who contracted it.
That rate could potentially come down even further, as authorities get better at detecting and testing for less seriously affected patients, said Antonia Ho, consultant in infectious diseases at Glasgow University’s Centre for Virus Research.
“At the start of an outbreak detection will always be skewed towards severe cases because those are the ones that are going to be picked up by doctors and hospitals, because they need treatment. But as surveillance improves you will pick up less severe cases, and they are more likely to survive.
“We won’t know the accurate fatality rate until we can do large population studies, when you can find out the number of people who were infected but either had no symptoms or very mild ones.”
Cases recorded so far suggest most infections are not serious. “It appears that the majority of infected persons have mild symptoms, though a small proportion do develop breathing difficulties, including pneumonia,” said Ho, a specialist in respiratory epidemics. The question for experts is who might be susceptible to getting more seriously sick – and with many cases only recently recorded, how long it takes to identify cases that need more medical help.
A recent paper suggests that it takes an average of eight days from symptoms first appearing to the onset of breathing difficulties, according to Ho. “It can seem OK at first, then get much more serious, though only in a small proportion of people.”



I don’t think we know enough at the moment to say how it’s going to pan out
Prof Paul Hunter, University of East Anglia

So far, although infections have been identified in children as young as two, the vast majority of victims have been older, and most have had underlying health conditions.
The Observer has compiled a list of 47 coronavirus victims, whose cases were reported in detail by Chinese authorities up to 29 January. Most were provided by the government of Hubei, the province at the centre of the crisis, which gave the last case details on 25 January, with others from Sichuan and Henan provinces, and city authorities in Beijing and Shanghai.
They show many victims already suffered from illnesses including diabetes, heart problems, chronic bronchitis and other conditions. However there’s no explanation for the apparent “outlier” cases of relatively young victims, and no details as to why these cases have been made public.
But they do raise questions about whether some healthy people in middle age could be vulnerable to the disease. The youngest victim, aged 36, was of particular concern, experts said, because it was unclear what made him susceptible, and if it was something that could affect others.
“This 36-year-old is an enigma,” David Heymann, professor of infectious disease epidemiology at the London School of Hygiene and Tropical Medicine, told Time magazine. “We know that the majority of people who have died to date have co-morbidity and are elderly.”
Adding to the concerns is data showing that the disease spreads more easily than Sars, with some of those infected able to pass it on before they show symptoms.
A cluster of four cases in Germany appears to have originated with a single traveller who didn’t show any signs of illness until after she had left the country, a group of scientists warned in a letter to the New England Journal of Medicine this week.
That may make it much harder to control the spread. Sars patients could largely be isolated as soon as they became infectious – when symptoms began to show – making it easier to trace and monitor contacts who could be at risk.
Modelling research published in the Lancet estimates that up to 75,800 people in Wuhan, the centre of the outbreak, may have been infected with the new coronavirus by 25 January. If the fatality rate stayed the same, at about 2%, that could mean more than 1,500 deaths. Far fewer than flu causes each year, but still more than the Sars outbreak.
And scientists have warned that even if the outbreak is brought under control, the number of new infections may keep rising for weeks or longer. 
“I don’t think we know enough at the moment to say how it’s going to pan out,” said Paul Hunter, professor of health protection at the University of East Anglia.
“It’s still plausible that this will be restricted to China and a few other countries and will ultimately peter out and disappear by the end of the summer. But it’s also plausible that it will spread very widely,” he said.
“I’m not convinced that we have enough data yet for the models to be sufficiently convincing about where between those two extremes it will eventually fit.”
Additional reporting by Jonathan Zhong


Topics



Coronavirus outbreak




The Observer






China




Infectious diseases




Medical research




Asia Pacific




news






Share on Facebook






Share on Twitter






Share via Email






Share on LinkedIn






Share on Pinterest






Share on WhatsApp






Share on Messenger








Reuse this content




 