Tourist sites in Asia hit by coronavirus fears – before and after

Tourist hubs in Asia before and after the spread of Covid-19.
Tourists visit Angkor Wat temple in Siem Reap province
Angkor Wat temple in Siem Reap province in Cambodia. Photograph by Tang Chhin Sothy/AFP/Getty Images
Tourists arriving from Nusa Penida in Denpasar on Indonesia's resort island of Bali
Denpasar on the Indonesian resort island of Bali. Photograph by Sonny Tumbelaka/AFP/Getty Images

Visitors at the Merlion park in Singapore
Merlion Park in Singapore. Photographs by Roslan Rahman and Catherine Lai/AFP/Getty Images
Devotees offering prayers at Erawan shrine in Bangkok
Erawan Shrine in Bangkok, Thailand. Photographs by Jewel Samad and Mladen Antonov/AFP/Getty Images
Tiananmen Square in Beijing in China
Tiananmen Square in Beijing, China. Photographs by Mark Ralston and Greg Baker/AFP/Getty Images
Tourists and locals enjoying drinks and food on tables set up on the pavement in the old quarter of Hanoi
The old quarter of Hanoi in Vietnam. Photographs by Hoang Dinh Nam and Manan Vatsyayana/AFP/Getty Images
Tourists gathering outside the Jakarta History Museum in the Kota Tua area of Jakarta
The Jakarta History Museum in the Kota Tua district of the Indonesian capital. Photographs by Aamir Qureshi and Adek Berry/AFP/Getty Images
Tourists taking pictures at the Peak in Hong Kong
Victoria Peak in Hong Kong. Photographs by Dale de la Rey and Vivek Prakash/AFP/Getty Images
People visiting Sensoji temple in Tokyo’s Asakusa district
Sensoji temple in the Asakusa district of Tokyo, Japan. Photograph by Charly Triballeau/AFP/Getty Images
The Gyeongbokgung palace in Seoul in South Korea
Gyeongbokgung Palace in Seoul, South Korea. Photograph by Ed Jones/AFP/Getty Images

Topics



Photography then and now






Asia Pacific




Infectious diseases




Asia




Photography




Indonesia




Hong Kong




news






Share on Facebook






Share on Twitter






Share via Email






Share on LinkedIn






Share on Pinterest






Share on WhatsApp






Share on Messenger








Reuse this content




 