Australian airlines offer credit for cancelled flights as routes slashed amid coronavirus

Passengers can ask airlines for a credit for a cancelled flight but getting through to customer service will be a major challenge as Qantas and Jetstar cause chaos by grounding the majority of their international and domestic fleet.
The national carrier announced on Tuesday that 90% of international flights and 60% of domestic flights will be cancelled from the end of the month until the end of May, and Virgin is widely tipped to follow suit within days.
The airlines will honour the bookings with a flight credit voucher, which you can use within a fairly generous period of 12 months, but there is a deadline of 31 March for applying. The change fees – even on the cheapest restricted tickets – will be waived. However, the customer will have to cover the difference in the fare, if any.
Passengers who would like a full refund may be granted one if they insist, the aviation commentator Steve Creedy told Guardian Australia.



Airlines in crisis: Virgin and Qantas under pressure as government hints at support package







Read more





“At the moment most airlines are offering people the capacity to take a credit and I understand if you push they’ll give you a refund as well,” the editor of Airline Ratings said.
“But the offer is for a credit for a flight at a later date. If you still absolutely want to fly in April or May given the drop in demand you may be able to fly but not necessarily on the flight you originally booked.”
The advice is don’t even try to get through on the phone; and if your flight is in the next day or so the airlines will contact you.
Some passengers have had success by contacting the company through its Facebook page.
“You can’t call,” Creedy said. “Pretty much all the call centres everywhere around the world are overloaded at the moment.
“It varies from airline to airline but unless you’re going to fly in the next 48 to 72 hours don’t call.”
If you booked your flights through a travel agent or a platform such as Booking.com or Webjet you need to contact them directly as Qantas won’t deal with your inquiry.
Qantas is advising on its website that due to high demand they’re experiencing long call wait times and are only dealing with urgent travel dates.
“We strongly encourage only those customers travelling within the next 48 hours to contact us if needed,” Qantas advises. “Consider contacting us at another time if you’re travelling outside this period.”
Creedy says the only way to contact any airline at the moment is online but even that can be frustrating.
“What I’ve found is that some airlines you can’t get online either,” he said.
Creedy said the grounding of so many flights was unprecedented.
“There’s been reductions in capacity before but not to the extent that we’ve seen here,” Creedy said. “This is bigger than anything I’ve seen in the quarter of a century I’ve been covering aviation in Australia.
“And it’s not just in Australia, of course, it’s global. American Airlines had huge cuts, Delta, Air Canada. They’re all trying to preserve cash. They don’t want to fly empty planes around and burn money.”
The Australian Competition and Consumer Commission has issued guidelines for consumers on their rights with event and travel cancellations due to the threat of Covid-19.

Twitter Moments Australia 
(@MomentsAU)
Qantas and Jetstar will make further and much larger cuts to domestic and international flying schedules. https://t.co/a2uX8SLCj3

March 16, 2020

Qantas and Jetstar said on Tuesday that significant falls in travel demand due to coronavirus and government restrictions meant further and much larger cuts to domestic and international flying schedules were necessary.
Creedy said passengers who chose to still fly during the restrictions would find the few planes in the air relatively empty.
“Delta said even with a 50% reduction in capacity in April and May they still only expected their planes to be 20 to 30% full,” Creedy said.



US airline industry seeks $50bn bailout amid coronavirus pandemic







Read more





“With Qantas down to just 10% capacity I assume they’ll be pretty full, mainly with people coming home to Australia. With domestic it’s only a 60% cut so you should still be able to get a seat.
While flights will be refundable, travellers are faced with a headache for any land plans they made. Travel insurance taken out after late January will not be paid by most insurance companies.
Last week Qantas announced a 23% reduction in international flights and a 5% reduction in domestic flights, representing the grounding of 150 planes. Those original reductions between May and mid-September were still in place.
Qantas said flexibility would remain in place because things were changing rapidly.
“Customers who make a new domestic or international booking and later decide they no longer wish to travel, can cancel their flight and retain the value of the booking as a Qantas travel credit or Jetstar travel voucher. This applies to bookings made from 10 March 2020 until 31 March 2020 for travel before 31 May 2020.”


Topics



Coronavirus outbreak






Airline industry




Business




Virgin Australia




Qantas




Jetstar




Travel & leisure




news






Share on Facebook






Share on Twitter






Share via Email






Share on LinkedIn






Share on Pinterest






Share on WhatsApp






Share on Messenger








Reuse this content




 