Sevilla v Roma postponed as flight grounded in Italy due to coronavirus

Roma have announced they will not travel to Spain for their Europa League match against Sevilla on Thursday after their flight from Italy was not authorised to land.
The Italian club tweeted: “AS Roma will not go to Spain for the Europa League match against Sevilla due to lack of authorisation from local authorities. More details will be announced by Uefa.”



Arsenal players in self-isolation as Manchester City game postponed due to coronavirus







Read more





This week the Spanish government cancelled all flights to and from Italy in an attempt to contain coronavirus but the first leg of the last-16 tie at the Ramón Sánchez Pizjuán Stadium had been scheduled to go ahead in line with measures taken in Spain for all games to be played without fans until 22 March. The squad will now stay in Italy, where all matches have been suspended until 3 April amid a nationwide lockdown. 
Earlier, Getafe president Angel Torres told reporters his club refused to travel to Italy for their game at Inter, even if it meant they were kicked out of the competition. The region of Lombardy, where Milan is located, is at the epicentre of Europe’s worse coronavirus outbreak. The country has had over 10,000 cases of Covid-19 and 631 deaths recorded so far. 
The match at San Siro is due to be played without fans. “We’re not going to play, we’re not going to travel to Italy, that has been decided,” Torres told reporters outside the club’s stadium. “I can guarantee that we will not travel to Italy. Uefa will decide what happens next.” The Getafe chief earlier told Onda Cero radio the club had asked the Spanish soccer federation to postpone the game, also requesting that the match be moved away from Italy. 
“We have looked for an alternative to playing in Milan. We don’t want to be in the focal point of the coronavirus outbreak, we don’t need that. We have also asked the (Spanish) federation to demand the suspension,” he said. “If we have to lose the tie, then we lose it. We don’t want to run any sort of risk. We are really excited about this match but if we have to lose it, then so be it.”
In Germany, a second division player at Hannover has become the first professional footballer to test positive for the virus. The club say their defender Timo Hübers is in quarantine at home while the rest of the playing staff will be tested.
“It is assumed that Hübers got infected at an event in Hildesheim on Saturday evening,” the club said in a statement. “Since the 23-year-old has had no contact with his teammates since the infection, which can be precisely localised, it cannot be assumed that teammates have become infected. Nevertheless, we will act responsibly – the entire professional squad, trainer team and staff will be tested for the virus as a precaution.”

Sign up to The Recap, our weekly email of editors’ picks.
Meanwhile in France, the French League Cup final between Paris Saint-Germain and Lyon, initially scheduled for 4 April, has been postponed. The French League said on Wednesday: “A new date will be set depending on the evolution of the sanitary situation and on both clubs’ future in European competitions.”
PSG face Borussia Dortmund behind closed doors in the Champions League last 16 on Wednesday evening, while Lyon are scheduled to play Juventus in Turin without fans next Tuesday. France has banned gatherings of more than 1,000 people in a bid to contain the spread of coronavirus, which has infected 1,784 people and killed 33 in the country.


Topics



Football






Europa League




Roma




Sevilla




Coronavirus outbreak




Hannover




Paris Saint-Germain






Share on Facebook






Share on Twitter






Share via Email






Share on LinkedIn






Share on Pinterest






Share on WhatsApp






Share on Messenger








Reuse this content




 