Fears grow Sophie Grégoire Trudeau picked up coronavirus on London trip

Sophie Grégoire Trudeau tested positive for Covid-19 just over a week after a high-profile event in London where she was filmed hugging the singer Leona Lewis and kissing the former Australian prime minister Julia Gillard.
The wife of the Canadian prime minister was also photographed at the Wembley Arena We Day event on 4 March alongside the F1 driver Lewis Hamilton and the actor Idris Elba. On the same day Grégoire Trudeau also went to an International Women’s Day conference attended by the former supreme court president Lady Hale.
It is feared Grégoire Trudeau may have contracted the virus during her London trip. She reported feeling unwell following her return to Canada earlier this week.


Sophie Grégoire Trudeau with her daughter and mother in law at the We event in London. Idris Elba and Lewis Hamilton were among the guests.
The 4 March event was organised by the development charity We, an organisation for which Trudeau serves as a wellbeing ambassador.
She was introduced on stage by Lewis, who greeted her with a hug. Video of the event also shows her patting and kissing her fellow speaker, Gillard. Other celebrities at the event included the chef Jamie Oliver, the actor Alfie Allen, the singer Calum Scott and the model Adwoa Aboah. Grégoire Trudeau went to the event with her daughter Ella-Grace and mother-in-law Margaret Trudeau.






 
 Facebook 
 
 Twitter 
 
 Pinterest 

Grégoire Trudeau also attended an International Women’s Day conference at Canada House hosted by the Canadian high commissioner Janice Charette. Among the guests were the former president of the supreme court Lady Hale.
A supreme court spokeswoman said: “All justices are aware of the Public Health England guidance and are taking the necessary actions like everyone else.”
Global Affairs Canada has been approached for comment. Four days after the conference, Charette tweeted pictures of attendees, including one of her close to Grégoire Trudeau.

Janice Charette 
(@JaniceCharette)
Happy #IWD2020 from all of us at #CanadaHouse - we had an amazing celebration this week with some great surprise guests. Special thanks to all our speakers, to @ComeFromAwayUK and to Sophie Gregoire Trudeau for making it one to remember. #Inspired #IfYouCanSeeItYouCanBeIt pic.twitter.com/sSML8A84sz

March 8, 2020

During her London trip, Grégoire Trudeau also went to the Oxo Tower gallery for an exhibition of women’s photography organised by the charity ActionAid. A member of staff at the gallery said the gallery was considering what steps to take following news of Grégoire Trudeau’s positive test, but declined to comment further.

Farzana Parween Wahidy 
(@FarzanaWahidy)
Surprise of the day, Sophie Grégoire Trudeau and my picture! She has visited our exhibition in London. pic.twitter.com/oNnAqfqr1W

March 5, 2020

A woman she was photographed with at the gallery is Orla Fee, ActionAid’s communication’s director. A spokeswoman said: “She is self-isolating as a precaution. ActionAid is following all the relevant public health advice to ensure the well-being of all our staff.”
Trudeau announced on Thursday evening that she had tested positive for coronavirus and planned to remain in isolation for the next two weeks. Her symptoms have been described as mild.
In a statement, We said it had “not received indications of health concerns from any participants or other speakers at the event”. But it said it would continue to monitor this and was being advised by the NHS.
As a precaution, the organisation has also asked staff to work from home and cancelled all future events.
Hamilton, Elba, Gillard and Lewis have all been contacted for comment. None have reported symptoms of the virus.



Topics



Sophie Grégoire Trudeau






Justin Trudeau




Coronavirus outbreak




Canada




Lewis Hamilton




Julia Gillard




Leona Lewis




news






Share on Facebook






Share on Twitter






Share via Email






Share on LinkedIn






Share on Pinterest






Share on WhatsApp






Share on Messenger








Reuse this content




 