Woman let off cruise ship in Cambodia tests positive for coronavirus

Concerns have been raised over the possible spread of the new coronavirus among hundreds of passengers who disembarked from a cruise ship in Cambodia on Friday, after one of them was confirmed to have the disease following a second test carried out in Malaysia.
Scores of passengers who left the MS Westerdam, which had been at sea for two weeks after leaving Hong Kong on 1 February, have travelled on to other destinations.
The director general of Malaysia’s health ministry, Noor Hisham Abdullah, said he believed further precautions should have been taken when passengers disembarked.
Profile Who is Hun Sen, Cambodia’s prime minister?  
 Show 
 Hide  

The coronavirus outbreak has brought Cambodia's prime minister, Hun Sen, international attention after he was seen shaking hands with passengers disembarking from the cruise ship MS Westerdam. “It’s time for solidarity, not stigma,” said Hun Sen, having allowed the ship to dock after it was turned away by Taiwan, Guam, the Philippines, Thailand and Japan. An 83-year-old American passenger has since tested positive for the disease after travelling on to Malaysia. 
The world's longest serving prime minister, the 67-year-old assumed power in 1985. Born in Kampong Cham, Cambodia, the former member of the Khmer Rouge defected and fled the country in 1977 to fight against Pol Pot's tyrannical regime. He returned to the country as minister of foreign affairs when a new government was installed in 1979, and was 33 when he subsequently became PM. 
After eight years at the helm he lost the 1993 elections, but refused to accept the result, ultimately becoming "second prime minister" alongside Prince Norodom Ranariddh of the Funcinpec party. He then seized control in a coup in 1997. He has since led the Cambodian People's party to successive victories in elections which have been frequently criticised by international monitors. 
In September 2017 Hun Sen had opposition leader Kem Sokha arrested on treason charges, and Cambodia’s supreme court dissolved his Cambodia National Rescue party. Hun Sen went into the discredited 2018 election campaign unopposed, and the CPP won every single seat in parliament after a brutal crackdown.
Hun Sen has said he wishes to remain in power until 2028, and his recent moves have appeared to position Cambodia closer to China’s orbit of power. Deals with a Chinese company to build Dara Sakor international airport in a remote corner of the country, as well as a deep port capable of hosting large naval vessels, have raised suspicions that China will use the locations for military purposes. Hun Sen says they are intended to build a global logistics hub that will transform the economy.
Supporters argue that he has bought relative peace, stability and prosperity to a country ravaged by decades of civil war and genocide. However, the human rights record of the Cambodian government has been criticised. In recent cases, Kem Sokha spent 12 months in detention followed by house arrest before his trial began, Australian film-maker James Ricketson was initially sentenced to six years in jail for espionage, and a court jailed a man for three years for insulting the king on Facebook.
Martin Belam




Was this helpful?







Thank you for your feedback.

“Only 20 passengers had their tests done. That was what we were told,” he said. “The fact one case is positive, [means] all other passengers [have] exposure.” 
Cambodia was praised by the head of the World Health Organization for receiving the ship, which had been turned away by five other countries despite there being no confirmed cases onboard at the time.
The confirmation that an 83-year-old American passenger has since tested positive for the disease after travelling on to Malaysia has prompted questions about whether enough preventive measures have been taken.
Cambodian authorities initially called for the test results to be reviewed by Malaysia, while the ship’s operator, Holland America, described the tests as preliminary. On Sunday the Malaysian authorities confirmed the patient had been tested for a second time and that the results confirmed she had the virus.
Cambodia’s government said its own tests on passengers from MS Westerdam had been done in collaboration with the WHO and the US Centers for Disease Control and Prevention.
The American woman flew to Malaysia with 144 other cruise ship passengers. Only she and her husband showed symptoms. Her husband has since tested negative.
Q&A How can I protect myself and others from the coronavirus outbreak?  
 Show 
 Hide  
The World Health Organization is recommending that people take simple precautions to reduce exposure to and transmission of the coronavirus, for which there is no specific cure or vaccine.
The UN agency advises people to:
Frequently wash their hands with an alcohol-based hand rub or warm water and soap
Cover their mouth and nose with a flexed elbow or tissue when sneezing or coughing
Avoid close contact with anyone who has a fever or cough
Seek early medical help if they have a fever, cough and difficulty breathing, and share their travel history with healthcare providers
Many countries are now enforcing or recommending curfews or lockdowns. 
In the UK, NHS advice is that anyone with symptoms should stay at home for at least 7 days.
If you live with other people, they should stay at home for at least 14 days, to avoid spreading the infection outside the home.



Was this helpful?







Thank you for your feedback.

Most of the passengers have now left Kuala Lumpur. A further six were tested and confirmed to be negative before they were allowed to leave.
Rebecca Katz, director of the Centre for Global Health Science and Security at Georgetown University, said Cambodia made the best decision based on the information available at the time, when no cases had been confirmed, but she said diagnostic tests were not perfect.
“One, there are some questions about just how sensitive they are, but, two, it’s a matter of when you test. You might test somebody on day one and the test might say they are negative but by day 14 they will have developed the disease. There’s a lot of uncertainty around when you can test.”
She said it was hard to tell how many other people from the cruise ship might now be infected. “We don’t quite understand how disease is spreading on the ships, but it clearly is,” she added, pointing to the Diamond Princess where more than 350 people onboard are confirmed to have the disease in what is the biggest cluster of cases outside China.
Malaysia’s deputy prime minister, Waz Azizah Wan Ismail, said the country would not allow entry to any more Westerdam passengers, “taking into account that all those passengers were in close contact with the earlier positive case.” 

The female patient suffered from a cough but did not have a fever or difficulty breathing. A chest X-ray showed signs of pneumonia, officials said. Malaysian authorities are tracing people who had close contact with the patient.
The MS Westerdam had been turned away by Taiwan, Guam, the Philippines and Thailand as well as Japan, where the Diamond Princess remains quarantined.
Passengers onboard the Diamond Princess have been mostly confined to their cabins since 3 February following confirmation that a passenger who had disembarked in Hong Kong tested positive for the virus.
Tedros Adhanom Ghebreyesus, the director general of the WHO, said last week that Cambodia’s decision to welcome the MS Westerdam exemplified “international solidarity”, adding: “It’s time for solidarity, not stigma.” Cambodia’s prime minister, Hun Sen, greeted and shook hands with passengers as they disembarked.




Play Video





1:10





 Cruise ship rejected by five countries over coronavirus fears docks in Cambodia – video
Some health experts have raised concerns over how effectively Cambodia, which has close economic links with China, is monitoring cases of the virus. A research paper by academics at Harvard University, which analysed air traffic from Wuhan, the centre of the outbreak, suggested that the single case identified in Cambodia was below what might be expected. The study, which also raised concerns over undetected cases in Indonesia and Thailand, was published quickly to improve scientists’ understanding of the outbreak and so has not been peer-reviewed.
Hun Sen has refused to ban flights from China and has also declined to evacuate citizens from Wuhan, stating that doing so would damage diplomatic relations and the country’s economic interests. At a press conference last month, he threatened to throw out any journalists or officials wearing masks. 
The death toll from Hubei province rose by 100 late on Sunday night, taking the total number of fatalities to 1,765. There are at least 70,400 confirmed cases around the world.
Holland America said in a statement that on 10 February all 2,257 passengers and crew were temperature-tested and “not one person had an elevated temperature”.
It said: “Disembarking guests also completed a written health questionnaire and the passports of everyone onboard were reviewed to ensure no one had travelled through mainland China in the prior 14 days.
It said there had been no indication of Covid-19 on the ship. Two hundred and 36 passengers and 747 crew remain onboard the vessel.


Topics



Coronavirus outbreak






Malaysia




Cambodia




Asia Pacific




news






Share on Facebook






Share on Twitter






Share via Email






Share on LinkedIn






Share on Pinterest






Share on WhatsApp






Share on Messenger








Reuse this content




 