Dominic Raab advises UK public to avoid all non-essential travel

The UK foreign secretary, Dominic Raab, has advised the British public to avoid non-essential travel anywhere in the world for at least 30 days as the government steps up its battle against Covid-19.
Raab said the dramatic decision followed on from the prime minister’s announcement on Monday that all members of the public should avoid non-essential social contact.
He said the Foreign Office was responding to “fast-changing international circumstances”, including the growing number of countries that have closed their borders.
“The speed and the range of those measures across other countries is unprecedented,” he said.
“UK travellers abroad now face widespread international border restrictions and lockdowns in various countries. The FCO will always consider the safety and the security of British nationals, so with immediate effect today I have taken the decision to advise British nationals against non-essential travel, globally, for an initial period of 30 days and of course subject to ongoing review.

“We want to reduce the risk of leaving vulnerable British travellers stranded overseas,” he said, saying that anyone deciding to travel would have to take responsibility for any consequences should they be unable to return home.
Raab also stressed that it was unrealistic to expect the government to offer emergency repatriation for many tourists. “No one should be under any illusions. It is costly, it is expensive to coordinate,” he said.
The foreign secretary said international haulage and freight would not be included in the advice, because of the importance of maintaining supply chains for goods.
Quick guide What to do if you have coronavirus symptoms in the UK  
 Show 
 Hide  

Symptoms are defined as either:
a high temperature - you feel hot to touch on your chest or back
a new continuous cough - this means you've started coughing repeatedly
NHS advice is that anyone with symptoms should stay at home for at least 7 days.
If you live with other people, they should stay at home for at least 14 days, to avoid spreading the infection outside the home.
After 14 days, anyone you live with who does not have symptoms can return to their normal routine. But, if anyone in your home gets symptoms, they should stay at home for 7 days from the day their symptoms start. Even if it means they're at home for longer than 14 days.
Information: If you live with someone who is 70 or over, has a long-term condition, is pregnant or has a weakened immune system, try to find somewhere else for them to stay for 14 days.
If you have to stay at home together, try to keep away from each other as much as possible.
After 7 days, if you no longer have a high temperature you can return to your normal routine.
If you still have a high temperature, stay at home until your temperature returns to normal.
If you still have a cough after 7 days, but your temperature is normal, you do not need to continue staying at home. A cough can last for several weeks after the infection has gone.
Source: NHS England on 18 March 2020




Was this helpful?







Thank you for your feedback.

“We do regard this kind of travel as essential, and we will work with industry to issue detailed advice which maintains the flow of goods whilst protecting the wellbeing of staff who are working on those routes,” he said.
The significant escalation in the government’s advice followed Monday’s statement by Boris Johnson, who conceded it was the most draconian set of measures seen in peacetime.
Responding to Raab, the shadow foreign secretary highlighted the cases of individual travellers stranded abroad without advice from the government or their travel company.
Emily Thornberry said the response to coronavirus represented “a chronic failure of global leadership and coordination, in which our own government has sadly been one of the parties”.

A string of other MPs also confronted Raab with details of their constituents stuck overseas.
Former Foreign Office minister Heather Wheeler pointed to a case involving a British tourist in Kiev, where she said the embassy was closed. “Unfortunately we are hearing about certain embassies being shut. And it’s £1.80 a minute to phone the Foreign Office helpline, and it’s a 58-minute delay,” she said.
Labour MP Carolyn Harris highlighted the case a British couple stranded in Cyprus. “Their flights are cancelled, their hotel room needs vacating, their insurance is about to expire, and the insurance company is only offering to pay retrospective costs, when they return to the UK.”
The foreign secretary replied that where was a “groundswell” of UK nationals in a particular location, “what we’re trying to do is ensure the reasons those flights aren’t running in and out can be addressed”.
Raab was speaking after a cabinet meeting, at which Johnson told his top team they were engaged in, “a war against the disease which we have to win”, according to an official readout.
Ministers agreed the creation of four new committees to coordinate the government’s response to the crisis. They will cover healthcare, the public sector (chaired by the Cabinet Office minister Michael Gove), economic and business and international.
With many industries, from pubs to airlines, clamouring for support as demand plunges, the chancellor, Rishi Sunak, reminded his colleagues of the measures already taken in the budget to support firms, according to the readout.
These included business rate cuts, one-off grants of up to £3,000 for small businesses, and reimbursement of statutory sick pay, but many businesses are calling for him to go much further.


Topics



Coronavirus outbreak






Infectious diseases




Medical research




Dominic Raab




news






Share on Facebook






Share on Twitter






Share via Email






Share on LinkedIn






Share on Pinterest






Share on WhatsApp






Share on Messenger








Reuse this content




 