Coronavirus latest: 11 March at a glance

US cases pass 1,000
The US has now confirmed more than 1,000 cases of the virus across 38 states. Some states, including most recently Michigan, have declared a state of emergency. New York’s governor Andrew Cuomo announced he will send the national guard into a New York City suburb, Rochelle, to assist with what’s thought to be the the country’s biggest cluster of cases.
Nadine Dorries tests positive
In the UK, junior health minister Nadine Dorries has gone into self-isolation after testing positive for the virus. She was thought to have come into contact with hundreds of people in the past week, including the prime minister Boris Johnson and his fiancee, Carrie Symonds.
Arsenal isolates players
Arsenal Football Club is placing some of their players in self-isolation and postponing their Premier league match with Manchester City set for Wednesday night. The move came after it emerged that the unspecified number of players had met the chairman of Greek club Olympiakos on 27 February. He has since tested positive.
Australia announces health spending package
Australia’s government has announced a $2.4bn health package in response to the virus, including pop-up fever clinics, a $30m awareness campaign, and the addition of telehealth to its Medicare list of subsidised treatments. Doctors have criticised the “confusing” process for people who think they should be tested, with long queues outside hospitals. The Northern Territory, which has a large population of First Nations people, has finalised its own plan to address the “severe” risk to people living in remote communities.
Cases rise in South Korea and Japan
In South Korea, where authorities had hoped a severe outbreak was being contained, cases spiked again on Wednesday by 242 compared with less than 100 the day before. Japan reported 59 new cases on Wednesday, its biggest one-day rise since the outbreak began. The nation was also forced to scale back ceremonies to mark the ninth anniversary of the triple disaster of tsunami, earthquake and Fukushima nuclear meltdown in March 2011.
Global death toll passes 4,000
More than 4,000 people have died as a result of the outbreak and 116,558 have been infected, according to figures compiled by the Johns Hopkins University Centre for Systems Science and Engineering. As of Tuesday afternoon GMT, the centre said 64,391 people with confirmed infections had also recovered. 
A sixth person dies in the UK
The number of cases in the UK increased by 54 to 373 on Tuesday, according to Department of Health and Social Care figures, and the sixth death was confirmed after West Hertfordshire Hospitals NHS Trust said a man in his early 80s with underlying health conditions had died.
Italian death toll increases sharply
The number of people who have died in Italy since the outbreak began increased by more than a third; up by 168 to 631, the local civil protection agency said on Tuesday. It was the greatest daily rise in absolute numbers in the country since the contagion came to light on 21 February, Reuters reported.
UK peak expected within a fortnight
The start of the UK peak of the outbreak is expected within the next fortnight, England’s deputy chief medical officer has said. Dr Jenny Harries said the UK was likely to see “many thousands of people” contract the virus, but that “99% of those will almost certainly get better and most people will have a really quite mild disease and will not need to be in hospital”.
Grand Princess passengers finally disembark
In the US, people on the cruise ship that has been kept off the Californian coast for five days after coronavirus cases were detected onboard have been allowed to disembark at the Port of Oakland. In all, there were 21 confirmed cases of coronavirus.


Topics



Coronavirus outbreak




Coronavirus: at a glance






Infectious diseases




Japan






Share on Facebook






Share on Twitter






Share via Email






Share on LinkedIn






Share on Pinterest






Share on WhatsApp






Share on Messenger








Reuse this content




 