BBC suspends filming of EastEnders due to coronavirus

The BBC has suspended filming of EastEnders and refocused its efforts on providing coverage of the coronavirus outbreak with a promise to launch daily educational programmes if schools are closed.
As part of a range of measures, the BBC said it would start to use its local radio stations as hubs to coordinate volunteer help for the elderly, refocus its food website around recipes that can be cooked with limited ingredients, and add additional box sets of popular dramas to the iPlayer service for people who are self-isolating.
School year groups will have their own shows on iPlayer, with each accompanied by a self-learning programme for students in order to maintain ongoing education during an expected shutdown. There will also be daily educational podcasts for BBC Sounds, while plans to scrap the afternoon broadcast of CBBC’s Newsround bulletin have been delayed so children can remain informed.
The decision to pause filming on EastEnders and other long-running dramas including Casualty, Doctors and Holby City comes as broadcasters face the prospect of months of empty schedules.
In an effort to ensure EastEnders remains on air for as long as possible, the BBC will cut the number of episodes broadcast from four to two a week, using already filmed footage. With the show filmed weeks before broadcast, the decision to halve the output means it could be possible for the show to stay on air for several months.
Quick guide What to do if you have coronavirus symptoms in the UK  
 Show 
 Hide  

Symptoms are defined as either:
a high temperature - you feel hot to touch on your chest or back
a new continuous cough - this means you've started coughing repeatedly
NHS advice is that anyone with symptoms should stay at home for at least 7 days.
If you live with other people, they should stay at home for at least 14 days, to avoid spreading the infection outside the home.
After 14 days, anyone you live with who does not have symptoms can return to their normal routine. But, if anyone in your home gets symptoms, they should stay at home for 7 days from the day their symptoms start. Even if it means they're at home for longer than 14 days.
Information: If you live with someone who is 70 or over, has a long-term condition, is pregnant or has a weakened immune system, try to find somewhere else for them to stay for 14 days.
If you have to stay at home together, try to keep away from each other as much as possible.
After 7 days, if you no longer have a high temperature you can return to your normal routine.
If you still have a high temperature, stay at home until your temperature returns to normal.
If you still have a cough after 7 days, but your temperature is normal, you do not need to continue staying at home. A cough can last for several weeks after the infection has gone.
Source: NHS England on 18 March 2020




Was this helpful?







Thank you for your feedback.

Other shows affected by the BBC’s decision to stop filming include the Welsh-language soap opera Pobol y Cwm and the Scottish drama River City.
Many dramas have been rushing to finish filming before sets are shut down, and thousands of freelance staff in the British television industry are facing loss of work. This week the Guardian revealed that filming on Line of Duty and the new series of Peaky Blinders had been suspended.
Other measures the BBC announced on Wednesday include regular church services broadcast to the nation by the archbishop of Canterbury, updates on consumer matters relating to coronavirus on The One Show, and delays to the planned closure of the red button news service.
There are also plans to get exercise routines for older people and other fitness programming into people’s homes on TV or radio so Britons can stay fit. Plans also include live fundraising events to raise money for good causes that can help mitigate the impact of coronavirus.
The director general, Tony Hall, said the BBC would be using all its resources “to help keep the nation informed, educated and entertained”. Privately, some BBC executives point out that the corporation is showing its value as a public service broadcaster after a long period of attacks from politicians.
The corporation has already streamlined its level of news programming in order to keep a core news service on air during the crisis.


Topics



EastEnders






BBC One




BBC




Television industry




Soap opera




Coronavirus outbreak




Television




news






Share on Facebook






Share on Twitter






Share via Email






Share on LinkedIn






Share on Pinterest






Share on WhatsApp






Share on Messenger








Reuse this content




 