Andrew Yang: ex-presidential hopeful giving $1m in response to coronavirus

Andrew Yang, the former Democratic presidential hopeful, has said that he plans to distribute $1m to low-income workers across the country in response to the coronavirus pandemic through his not-for-profit group, Humanity Forward.
The organization plans to distribute $500,000 to 500 working poor households in New York City’s Bronx. By the end of March each family will receive $1,000.
The move echoes Yang’s signature policy proposal during his 2020 bid: a universal basic income paid directly to Americans.
The organization also plans to team up with the not-for-profit group One Fair Wage (OFW) to bolster its OFW Emergency Coronavirus Tipped and Service Worker Support Fund throughout New York.



More than half of Californians likely to get coronavirus, governor says







Read more





Yang’s organization will help fundraise for the program and offer assistance to OFW as it implements payments to New York City workers who have suffered the economic consequences of the coronavirus.
Additionally, Humanity Forward will issue one-time basic income payments to individuals who ask for emergency funds from the organization. According to the organization’s announcement: “Humanity Forward has pledged to match the first $500,000 in additional donations to go to those in need.”
“We’re in a crisis and my entire jam is that we need to put money in people’s hands so that we’re stronger and healthier and mentally healthier and that’s what I stand for, that’s what I my organization stands for,” Yang said in an interview on Thursday. “We’re in the midst of a crisis so I’m going to demonstrate what we should be doing.”
The question of a universal basic income has returned to national prominence since the coronavirus outbreak began. Lawmakers in both the Republican and Democratic parties have been increasingly supportive of a one-time direct payment to Americans to help them weather the impending financial crisis. On Thursday, Mitch McConnell, the Senate majority leader, introduced an emergency stimulus package that, among other proposals, would issue direct payments of as much as $1,200 to individual Americans.


Topics



Coronavirus outbreak






Philanthropy




Infectious diseases




news






Share on Facebook






Share on Twitter






Share via Email






Share on LinkedIn






Share on Pinterest






Share on WhatsApp






Share on Messenger








Reuse this content




 