Coronavirus outbreak – how will it affect my rights, pay and debts?

People across the UK may soon find themselves out of office for lengthy periods of time, whether they like it or not. It has been estimated that one fifth of the UK’s workforce could be absent during the weeks when the coronavirus is at its peak while millions more will find themselves working from home or even without anywhere to work.
With the disruption to the normal working week comes a myriad of questions for employees, employers, contractors and casual workers about what their rights are at such an unprecedented time – and how to ensure that any money problems stay short term and don’t stretch into the future.
Working from home
Google was one of the first companies to direct that employees from its European headquarters in Dublin work from home, a move which has been replicated many times in the last few weeks. Employers and companies have been told to talk to their staff as soon as possible and ensure that they have ways to work from home – via laptops and mobile phones. The Advisory, Conciliation and Arbitration Service (Acas) said anyone who is worried about going into the office should have their concerns listened to by their boss – but employers are not obliged to allow for time off nor unpaid leave. But if employees refuse to attend work or any other reasonable request, they could face disciplinary action.
What if staff get coronavirus?
Employees are entitled to statutory sick pay as long as they are sick for four days and earn at least £118 a week before tax. Workers – such as agency staff, those on zero-hour contracts and casuals – are also likely to be entitled to the £94.25 weekly payment. Acas says many workplaces offer better terms than the statutory however. In his budget last week, chancellor Rishi Sunak said the four-day rule would be suspended and reduced to one day for anyone who has been advised to self-isolate. Anyone who is not entitled to sick pay has been advised to contact their local jobcentre to see if they are able to claim universal credit or other allowances. Only employees and workers are entitled to statutory sick pay, not the “genuinely” self-employed said Acas.
What if people are told to self-isolate but are not sick?
Anyone who fears that they may have coronavirus has been told to contact the NHS 111 service. If the service advises someone to self-isolate, then they will be entitled to statutory sick pay. If employees are not sick but are not wanted in work, then they should be paid their usual salary. For workers however, who have fewer employment rights, there is typically no obligation for employers to pay them or for them to provide services.
Do people still get paid if a workplace is shut down?
Employees should get their normal pay unless contracts entitle the employer to lay them off, in which case they are entitled to five days’ guaranteed pay. If the contract does not include this right and the workplace is shut for some time, then employers could require staff to take their annual leave while it is closed.
What about holidays?
Travel has been severely disrupted with limits to flights and cancelled holidays. If someone is intent on going away for a break however, their holidays may be cancelled but sufficient notice must be given. This will be the same amount of time as is being taken by the employee - so if they are going away for two weeks, they need two weeks’ notice to cancel it. An explanation or justification does not have to be given by the employer.
What happens if schools shut?
Employees are entitled to one or two days off to arrange for emergencies and could use that to put in place alternative childcare arrangements. This may not be paid time off and can include dependants ranging from spouses, children, parents, people who rely on them for help or people who receive care. Should a child or dependant become unwell and need to self-isolate, then the parent may also need to do so.
Money worries
Under the government plans, it will now be easier for people to claim sick pay and get benefits. However, the level of benefits that are available will be far below what many people will need to cover their household costs. “The government is making changes so it’s easier and quicker to claim sick pay and to get benefits. Those are welcome but statutory sick pay is only £94 a week and the standard allowance in universal credit is just £73 a week – that is less than a quarter of the average income. For many people this will mean their normal debt repayments will now become unmanageable,” said Sara Williams of Debt Camel, a blog advising on debt issues. The worst tactic, she said, is to try and borrow to get through any problems. As the crisis may last a number of weeks, people could see debts mount up and become unaffordable when things do return to normal.
Ask for help
Banks including Royal Bank of Scotland, Lloyds and TSB are to offer repayment holidays on mortgages and loans, as part of relief measures – part of an effort to stem a potential tide of defaults if customers become ill, have to self-isolate or lose pay from employers and clients as the virus continues to spread. In Italy, where the crisis is much more advanced, all mortgage repayments have been suspended. Williams says she hopes more lenders follow the lead set by the banks here not just in home loans but on credit cards and catalogue debt as well. If someone is experiencing difficulty with their repayments, they should talk to their creditors. “If your income has dropped because of coronavirus, whether you are ill, you have been told to self-isolate, you are caring for someone ill or children not at school, your hours have been cut or your self-employed income has dropped a lot, tell your creditors and ask for a payment break,” she said. “Don’t wait for your lender to make an announcement. The FCA’s rules say that all lenders should treat customers who can’t make payments ‘with forbearance and due consideration’. That means they have to listen to what you say and should look at freezing interest and taking a much lower or no payment.”
And most importantly …
People should not allow worry to overcome them. Missing just a few payments on credit cards will not result in having to go to court and rushing into insolvency, whether through bankruptcy or a debt relief order, is not a good idea until a payment break has been applied for, says Williams.


Topics



Pay




The Observer






Banks and building societies




Coronavirus outbreak




Work & careers




Benefits




features






Share on Facebook






Share on Twitter






Share via Email






Share on LinkedIn






Share on Pinterest






Share on WhatsApp






Share on Messenger








Reuse this content




 