What we know so far about the coronavirus outbreak

The official death toll stands at 26 people, most of them in Hubei province in central China, but two people have died outside of that zone – one man just outside of Beijing, and the other in the north-eastern province of Heilongjiang, which borders Russia.
More than 800 people in China have been confirmed to have contracted the novel coronavirus so far.
The Chinese government has restricted the movement of about 33 million people with an unprecedented and indefinite lockdown after the virus originated in the city of Wuhan.
A new 1,000-bed hospital is being built in Wuhan specifically to deal with the coronavirus outbreak, and authorities there expect to have it completed next week.
Thailand has confirmed five cases, with Japan and South Korea confirming two cases each and one confirmed case in the US and Nepal.
14 people in the UK have been tested for the virus; so far, five have been cleared.
In Australia, at least six people are being monitored for signs of the virus, while public health authorities warn the world is likely to see more cases confirmed in countries outside of China in the coming days.
The World Health Organization’s emergency committee has concluded it’s “too early” to declare an international public health emergency, but says the situation is still to be considered an emergency in China. “It has not yet become a global health emergency. It may yet become one,” said the WHO director general, Dr Tedros Adhanom Ghebreyesus.
A first version of a vaccine could start trials in the summer, but it will be close to year before vaccines are available publicly from drugs companies, one expert said at he World Economic Forum in Davos.
The Chinese government has suspended flights going out of Wuhan.


Topics



Coronavirus outbreak






China




Asia Pacific




news






Share on Facebook






Share on Twitter






Share via Email






Share on LinkedIn






Share on Pinterest






Share on WhatsApp






Share on Messenger








Reuse this content




 