University apologizes for saying xenophobia is 'common reaction' to coronavirus spread

The University of California, Berkeley apologized on Thursday evening for an Instagram posting that listed xenophobia and “fears about interacting with those who might be from Asia” as a common reaction to the spread of coronavirus.
The post has since been deleted following an outcry online.
Q&A How can I protect myself and others from the coronavirus outbreak?  
 Show 
 Hide  
The World Health Organization is recommending that people take simple precautions to reduce exposure to and transmission of the coronavirus, for which there is no specific cure or vaccine.
The UN agency advises people to:
Frequently wash their hands with an alcohol-based hand rub or warm water and soap
Cover their mouth and nose with a flexed elbow or tissue when sneezing or coughing
Avoid close contact with anyone who has a fever or cough
Seek early medical help if they have a fever, cough and difficulty breathing, and share their travel history with healthcare providers
Many countries are now enforcing or recommending curfews or lockdowns. 
In the UK, NHS advice is that anyone with symptoms should stay at home for at least 7 days.
If you live with other people, they should stay at home for at least 14 days, to avoid spreading the infection outside the home.



Was this helpful?







Thank you for your feedback.

The image, uploaded to the university’s heath services account, sought to explain how to “manage fears and anxiety” about the spread of the highly contagious illness now listed by the World Health Organization as a global public health emergency.
Among the expected reactions listed, which included “anxiety, worry, panic” the posting described: “Xenophobia: fears about interacting with those who might be from Asia and guilt about these feelings”.

Adrienne Shih 
(@adrienneshih)
Confused and honestly very angry about this Instagram post from an official @UCBerkeley Instagram account.When is xenophobia ever a “normal reaction”? pic.twitter.com/hH4AgQKluM

January 30, 2020

“The post has been taken down and we regret any misunderstanding it may have caused,” Roqua Montez, executive director of communications and media relations at Berkeley, told CBS News.
Students and alumni had slammed the image on social media, pointing to the fact that the campus has a large Asian-American student population.
The US state department has now warned Americans to avoid all travel to China due to the rapid spread of the disease, which has claimed over 200 lives in China and infected over 9,700 people. Six people have now been confirmed with the disease in the US, as the UK confirmed its first two coronavirus on Friday.


Topics



California






Coronavirus outbreak




Infectious diseases




Race




Instagram




news






Share on Facebook






Share on Twitter






Share via Email






Share on LinkedIn






Share on Pinterest






Share on WhatsApp






Share on Messenger








Reuse this content




 