Coronavirus: Britons to be quarantined in Wirral after arriving from Wuhan

Around 120 Britons will fly from the Chinese city at the centre of the coronavirus outbreak overnight and land in the UK on Friday morning where they will be taken to Wirral for a fortnight’s quarantine.
It news came shortly before the risk level from the virus in the UK was raised from low to moderate and the World Health Organization declared it a global health emergency.
Dominic Raab, the foreign secretary, announced that the emergency flight, which was delayed by 24 hours, would be taking off from Wuhan and was due to land at RAF Brize Norton in Oxfordshire at around 9am.
Military doctors will be onboard the chartered plane in case immediate treatment is necessary, although any passengers displaying symptoms of the virus – which can include a sore throat, fever and breathing difficulties – will be barred from boarding.
It is understood there will be a quarantine area in the plane in case somebody falls ill during the flight.
The returnees will be bussed to Arrowe Park hospital in Wirral where they will be monitored and treated if any symptoms develop. They will be staying in an accommodation block usually designated for NHS staff. Margaret Greenwood, the Labour MP for Wirral West, said she had spoken to the health secretary, Matt Hancock, who told her that experts believed it was unlikely that those quarantined had the virus.
Passengers were asked to sign contracts agreeing to the 14-day quarantine as a condition of getting the flight home. A further 50 EU nationals will also be on the chartered flight, which will fly on to Spain where it will complete its journey.
Quick guide What are coronavirus symptoms and should I go to a doctor?  
 Show 
 Hide  


What is Covid-19?

It is caused by a member of the coronavirus family that has never been encountered before. Like other coronaviruses, it has come from animals.



What are the symptoms this coronavirus causes?

The virus can cause pneumonia-like symptoms. Those who have fallen ill are reported to suffer coughs, fever and breathing difficulties.
In the UK, the National Heath Service has defined the symptoms as:
a high temperature - you feel hot to touch on your chest or back
a new continuous cough - this means you've started coughing repeatedly



Should I go to the doctor if I have a cough?

Medical advice varies around the world - with many countries imposing travel bans and lockdowns to try and prevent the spread of the virus. In many place people are being told to stay at home rather than visit a doctor of hospital in person. Check with your local authorities.
In the UK, NHS advice is that anyone with symptoms should stay at home for at least 7 days. If you live with other people, they should stay at home for at least 14 days, to avoid spreading the infection outside the home.



Is the virus being transmitted from one person to another?

Yes. China’s national health commission confirmed human-to-human transmission in January.



How many people have been affected?

China’s national health commission confirmed human-to-human transmission in January. As of 19 March, more than 219,000 people have been infected in more than 150 countries, according to the Johns Hopkins University Center for Systems Science and Engineering.
There have been over 8,900 deaths globally. Just over 3,200 of those deaths have occurred in mainland China. Many of those who have died had underlying health conditions, which the coronavirus complicated.
More than 84,000 people are recorded as having recovered from the coronavirus.




Was this helpful?







Thank you for your feedback.

Raab said: “We are pleased to have confirmation from the Chinese authorities that the evacuation flight from Wuhan airport to the UK can depart at 0500 local time on Friday 31 January. The safety and security of British nationals is our top priority. Our embassy in Beijing and consular teams remain in close contact with British nationals in the region to ensure they have the latest information they need.”
Some Britons with family members who hold a Chinese passport have decided to remain in Wuhan because they faced being separated if they had chosen to travel.
Matt Raw and his 75-year-old mother, Hazel, were entitled to a place on the flight but are staying in Wuhan as Matt’s wife, Ying, a Chinese national, was not allowed to board because of strict rules imposed by the Chinese government.
“I would hate for anything to happen to [my mother] and I would much rather be somewhere where the virus isn’t,” said Raw. “Half of the British people here that wanted to leave are still trapped. The government’s only done half the job.”
The death toll from the virus, which has spread to at least 16 countries, has reached 170, and there are more than 7,700 confirmed cases in China. A total of 161 British nationals have so far tested negative for the virus.
Scotland’s chief medical officer, Dr Catherine Calderwood, said it was “highly likely” there would be a positive case in the UK in the coming days.
On Thursday night the four chief medical officers of the UK increased the risk level ofcoronavirus from low to moderate. They said they “do not think the risk toindividuals in the UK has changed” but that the government should “plan for all eventualities”. 
The WHO said its decision to declare it a global emergency was no criticism of China but was designed to provide support for countries with “weaker health systems which are ill prepared to deal with [the coronavirus]”.
graphic
A British woman in Wuhan who claimed she was told she would have to leave her three-year-old son behind if she flew out because he had a Chinese passport said the Foreign Office was in discussions with counterparts in the country about her situation.
Natalie Francis, originally from York, said on Wednesday that Foreign Office staff in London told her she could leave on a flight but that her son Jamie must stay. She said she was told “nothing can be done”.
“He suffered from pneumonia last year and the only advice they can give is for me to leave him behind? Once again, thank you for nothing [Foreign Office] and Beijing embassy,” she wrote in a Facebook post.
However, Francis suggested in an update on Thursday morning that there might have been some progress on the matter, writing: “Been in touch with the [Foreign Office], Jamie and I are on the lists but they are still discussing with the Chinese government. Flight has been delayed but may be [leaving on] Friday with quarantine in the north-west for 14 days.”

The first US case of person-to-person transmission of the coronavirus has been confirmed by health officials. The individual is married to a Chicago woman who was diagnosed with the virus after she returned from a trip to Wuhan.
Elsewhere, an Italian cruise ship carrying 6,000 passengers was held at a port near Rome after two Chinese passengers fell ill with suspected coronavirus.
The couple boarded the Costa Smeralda on 25 January and later came down with fevers and breathing problems. However, local reports suggested they had tested negative.
An apartment-hotel in Yorkshire was put on lockdown after a man believed to be a Chinese national was taken to hospital on Wednesday evening by paramedics clad in quarantine suits.
York’s Staycity Hotel confirmed that the apartment where the man was staying had been sealed off and would undergo “a thorough environmental clean and disinfection”.
British Airways announced it would suspend flights to and from China to the end of February, one of a number of carriers stopping or reducing services to the affected country.
Russia closed its border with China and moved to stop issuing electronic visas to Chinese nationals. The prime minister, Mikhail Mishustin, pledged: “We have to do everything to protect our people.”
As China reported its biggest single-day jump in coronavirus deaths, the country’s football association cancelled all domestic games. 


Topics



Coronavirus outbreak






China




Asia Pacific




Health




news






Share on Facebook






Share on Twitter






Share via Email






Share on LinkedIn






Share on Pinterest






Share on WhatsApp






Share on Messenger








Reuse this content




 