Keeping the faith: how places of worship have adapted to the coronavirus crisis

Religious gatherings and services are being suspended across the country as faith communities work to comply with new restrictions to try to control the spread of coronavirus.
Measures being adopted include the cancellation of church services and mass, suspension of prayers and daily activities at mosques and prayer halls, and limiting weddings and funerals to immediate family only.
Here are some of the measures that some faith groups, along with the funeral industry, are introducing.
Catholic
Victoria’s Catholic bishops have suspended all public masses across the state. In Hobart and Perth, public masses are suspended but churches remain open for private prayer.



Coles and Woolworths urged to expand services to people with disabilities during coronavirus crisis







Read more





But Sydney’s Catholic archbishop, Anthony Fisher, said masses would continue across Sydney, however they would be limited to no more than 100 people, in accordance with the government’s new ban on gatherings of more than 100.
In a statement, Fisher said priests had been granted permission to temporarily increase the number of masses and celebrate multiple Sunday masses to accommodate the changes. Parishioners who are unwell have been asked not to attend public services.
“Please be assured that any Catholic who contracts Covid-19 will as far as possible be assisted by our clergy with the sacraments and other pastoral care,” he said.
Islam
The Lebanese Muslim Association, which is the caretaker for Australia’s largest mosque, at Lakemba, among others, said all activities at its mosques and prayer halls were suspended as of Thursday morning until further notice.
This includes daily prayers, weddings and funerals, as well as additional events and night prayer during Ramadan.
The association’s operations director, Ahmad Malas, said suspending all activities was “a big thing to do. We obviously have to bring the community on the journey with us.”
They are encouraging prayer at home and will be offering religious counselling and other services online and over the phone for as long as the suspension lasts.
“The decision to temporarily suspend activities was based on one of the fundamental principles in Islam to preserve human life,” the association said in a statement.
Jewish
Sydney synagogues have suspended services after a recommendation from the Sydney beth din.
In a statement, issued on Tuesday, a day before the government’s announcement of the new restrictions, the authority said there was no time to waste and recommended gatherings including weddings and funerals also be limited to immediate family.
Rabbi Moshe Gutnick said the Jewish community had already suffered as a result of Covid-19 outbreaks overseas and there were confirmed Covid-19 patients among Melbourne’s Jewish community. He said the average Australian resident didn’t appear to appreciate yet how quickly the virus spreads.
“We’re taking a very strong stance, stronger than the government’s in terms of gatherings,” he said.
“We’re better safe than sorry.”
Anglican
The Anglican archbishop of Sydney, Glenn Davies, said the Anglican church in Sydney would suspend all church gatherings until further notice.



Fears for refugees after guard at Brisbane immigration detention centre tests positive for coronavirus







Read more





He is encouraging churches to provide their services and sermons online or via other communication methods and said people would need to be “creative” in finding different ways to meet that are within the government guidelines.
Easter services will not take place and he will record a video of a Good Friday and Easter Sunday sermon.
“We have to make productive and useful decisions in this situation and I think that’s what we’ve done,” Davies said.
“I think in a time of crisis, let everyone put aside their own personal preferences and think of the common good. This is a pandemic, a global catastrophe.”
The funeral industry
In the funeral industry, businesses are looking at different ways to hold services that meet the new requirements.
Adrian Barrett, the vice president of the Australian Funeral Directors Association, said the situation was changing “day by day”.
He said in Western Australia, attendance at funerals was being limited to immediate family of up to 50 people. In Tasmania, some places were banning any attendance at funerals at all.
Barrett said livestreaming of funerals was already a common practice, but would increase as a result of Covid-19.
“People are making the decision about whether they webcast if people can’t be there any more,” he said.
Barrett said the guidelines around social distancing, including no hugging, kissing, or shaking hands, would have a psychological impact on people who were grieving and they would need support.
“A lot of the attendees at funerals would be people in high-risk categories such as the elderly. I think it’s really important for people to decide whether they need to attend,” he said.
“We’re on the frontline when it comes to dealing with the dead but our main concern is the vulnerability of families and friends we’re dealing with everyday.”


Topics



Coronavirus outbreak






Religion




Victoria




New South Wales




Sydney




explainers






Share on Facebook






Share on Twitter






Share via Email






Share on LinkedIn






Share on Pinterest






Share on WhatsApp






Share on Messenger








Reuse this content




 