How you can help your community during coronavirus

As the number of coronavirus cases across the US continues to grow, everyone from restaurant owners and musicians to the elderly and those with chronic illness have been affected.
On Tuesday, the federal Centers for Disease Control and Prevention reported 4,226 confirmed cases, including 75 deaths. For the people who are able, there perhaps has never been a more important time to give to those in need.
You can start by following guidelines on social distancing and local restrictions for self-quarantine. But here are some other ways to support your own community and those struggling all across the country:
Support local businesses and not-for-profits
In an effort to curb the spread of coronavirus, governors in at least nine states have announced the closure of eat-in restaurants and bars, while local officials have made sweeping bans on large gatherings.
Dozens of well-known restaurants have opted to wait out this virus behind closed doors. Others are still open, and are asking the community to support them by ordering pick-up or delivery, and making sure to tip the staff as much as they can.
Canlis, a fine-dining hotspot in Seattle, temporarily converted its restaurant into a drive-in burger eatery, bagel shed and family meal delivery service. Jessica Powers, spokeswoman for the restaurant, said the response from the community had been amazing. She encouraged anyone who wants to support the restaurant, but doesn’t want this more casual dining experience, to buy a gift card and make future bookings.
The arts sector has also been hit especially hard, with a wide array of performances and concerts canceled across the country. Theaters and orchestras are encouraging people who have tickets to a canceled performance to not ask for a refund and even consider donating further to the organization.
Look up your local businesses and not-for-profits online, and find out if there are ways you can still buy from them or donate.
Contribute to local social service organizations
There are plenty of groups and organizations helping those negatively impacted by coronavirus. The Center for Disaster Philanthropy recommends directing donations to free clinics in areas hit hardest by the outbreak, and also contributing to supplies of protective equipment and educational outreach initiatives about the virus.
Those people who were already vulnerable before the outbreak will probably feel its effects hardest and longest, so the center recommends contributing to food banks. But try not to just make it a single donation, as the impacts of this outbreak will probably be felt long into the future.
Paul Ash, executive director of the San Francisco-Marin Food Bank, said they are especially in need of volunteers in their warehouses and people who can help them open additional pantries. The food bank serves about 144,000 people on an average week, and is preparing for an increased need over the next few weeks because of the many people who are not going to work or have seen their job changed significantly because of the outbreak.
“Those people will probably have enough in their refrigerator for a week or two, or enough in the bank account, but they’ll eventually come to a point, if this is anything like the financial crisis in 07, 08, they’ll come to a point where they are willing to avail themselves to a free bag of groceries from the food bank,” said Ash.
Donate blood
With thousands of blood drives across the country canceled because of the outbreak, the American Red Cross and America’s Blood Centers announced on Tuesday that the US is facing a “severe blood shortage”. The organizations encouraged anyone who is healthy and eligible to give blood or platelets, to make an appointment to donate through the Red Cross.
The Red Cross’s leaders said they are taking additional steps to keep all donors safe, including checking the temperature of staff and donors and having plenty of hand sanitizer available.
“We understand why people may be hesitant to come out for a blood drive but want to reassure the public that blood donation is a safe process, and that we have put additional precautions in place at our blood drives to protect the health of safety of our donors and staff,” Gail McGovern, president and chief executive officer, American Red Cross, said in a statement.
Reach out to family and friends
Simply reaching out to those most severely affected by coronavirus can be a big help in such a turbulent time. For people older than 60 years and those with chronic illness or weakened immune systems, the virus can cause very severe issues.
These people may be stuck in their homes and need food deliveries, or simply looking for some emotional support.
But don’t stop there. Everyone is in the middle of a global pandemic. Staying connected with others through the many virtual tools at our disposal can be key to getting through this outbreak as unscathed as possible.


Topics



Coronavirus outbreak






features






Share on Facebook






Share on Twitter






Share via Email






Share on LinkedIn






Share on Pinterest






Share on WhatsApp






Share on Messenger








Reuse this content




 