Australian government plans coronavirus 'safety net' package as fresh rate cut tipped

Australia’s central bank is poised to make a significant intervention in the market, with analysts tipping an emergency rate cut and some form of quantitative easing on Thursday, as the Morrison government applies the finishing touches to a second round of economic stimulus, badged as a multibillion-dollar “safety net” package.
Income support measures and urgent financial help for businesses affected by the coronavirus pandemic will be signed off by the government within days, as industry groups warn of a “dire” downward spiral that is already seeing job losses across the country.
With the government stepping up social isolation measures, and with authorities reporting more cases of coronavirus, including a death in New South Wales on Wednesday, financial markets continued their turbulent run. The ASX plunged more than 6.4% on Wednesday, wiping out gains it made on Tuesday.



'They're going to go under': Australia's coronavirus-hit restaurants, bars and caterers seek bailout







Read more





The Victorian premier, Daniel Andrews, on Wednesday signalled that in the looming package the prime minister, Scott Morrison, would likely look at providing emergency cashflow for businesses on the frontline of the economic shock, because businesses needed “cash and liquidity and capital, so they can keep paying wages, so that workers can keep feeding their families”.
Andrews signalled he was focused in Victoria, and Morrison would be federally, on “underwriting mortgages, potentially, on guaranteeing employment”.
While the Reserve Bank is expected to make a significant intervention on Thursday morning, followed by a speech from the governor in the afternoon, the expenditure review committee of cabinet will be reviewing stimulus measures, which are expected to be unveiled by the weekend. A scaled-back parliament will meet to legislate the package in the first half of next week.
So far, the federal government has announced $17.6bn in economic measures in response to the downturn, on top of a $2.4bn health package. All states apart from Victoria and the Australian Capital Territory have also unveiled their own packages, totalling more than $4bn for both health and economic support.
On Wednesday, a range of new health measures signed off by national cabinet were put in place aimed at slowing the spread of the virus, including a ban on indoor gatherings of more than 100 people, a do-not-travel order for all overseas destinations, and strict new rules for visiting aged care homes.
As Morrison warned Australians to prepare for at least six months of disruption to society, business groups upped their calls for urgent financial help, saying the situation had “rapidly shifted” in the past week as the pandemic had escalated.
“Small businesses across the country are in dire need, bearing the brunt of restrictions on the movement of people and an economic downturn,” the Australian Chamber of Commerce and Industry chief executive, James Pearson, said.
“Without support for small business, thousands of Australians will lose their businesses, their jobs and their livelihoods and the economy would spiral downwards.



Australia's economic victims of coronavirus, just like the health victims, need help now | Richard Denniss







Read more





“Supporting businesses at this stage of the crisis requires measures that help them with their cashflow and enhance their capability and readiness for the recovery that lies ahead.”
The finance minister, Mathias Cormann, said the government was moving quickly to finalise the “significant” package of measures, which he hopes will be legislated when the scaled-down parliament meets in Canberra on Monday.
“It’s very clear this has been a very rapidly evolving situation. The extent of the economic impact has been accelerating significantly, including in particular because of the decisions that countries like Australia and many others have made in terms of international travel, control of their borders … and deliberately restricting activity domestically,” Cormann told Sky News on Wednesday.
“We have just got to work our way through all of it in the best possible way.”
He also said that the government was in discussion with the Reserve Bank of Australia as it finalised the stimulus package, with the government “kicking in the same direction” as the central bank.
With social distancing measures putting firms on the brink, business groups produced wishlists on Wednesday. The Australian Chamber of Commerce and Industry urged the government to provide payments equivalent in size to Newstart to businesses with a “material reduction in revenue either directly or indirectly attributable to Covid-19” to keep employees in work.
The group also asked the government to consider concessional loans – either through a deferred payment like a higher education loan or a business loan fund to give out loans of up to $500,000 with 80% of the debt guaranteed by the government – as well as wage subsidies to cover sick leave entitlements.
The Ai Group urged the government to consider measures such as lifting access to income support by waiving assets and income tests and waiting periods for people facing reduced hours, or lost employment. The business group argued this would materially assist many people including some self-employed and sole traders.
The Ai Group said some employers were considering topping up the incomes of casual employees who qualify for Newstart level payments. “The government should consider excluding these top-up payments from the income test that would apply to the income support payments,” the group said in a statement.
With the government expected to provide sector-specific support to tourism, which is hard hit by travel restrictions, the Ai Group said the government should significantly top up a $1bn regional fund outlined in the first stimulus package.
The Labor leader, Anthony Albanese, said the opposition would likely vote in support of the economic stimulus package when it came before parliament next week, but called for more urgency.
“We will be supportive, make no mistake, of economic stimulus,” Albanese said. “We know that the sooner the response, the more effective it will be and the less the cost will be in the long run,” he said.


Topics



Coronavirus outbreak






Australian politics




Australian economy




Scott Morrison




Business




Reserve Bank of Australia




Coalition




news






Share on Facebook






Share on Twitter






Share via Email






Share on LinkedIn






Share on Pinterest






Share on WhatsApp






Share on Messenger








Reuse this content




 