Coronavirus 6 March: at a glance

 Key developments in the global coronavirus outbreak on Friday include:
Donald Trump admits coronavirus ‘might’ have an impact
The US president has admitted that the coronavirus “might have an impact” on the US economy but said it would pass. He previously played down the economic impact of the outbreak, predicting last week that the stock market would bounce back. The Dow Jones sank 3.6% on Thursday. Meanwhile the US vice president, Mike Pence, who is heading the coronavirus efforts in the US, has admitted the country does not have enough testing kits: “We don’t have enough tests today to meet what we anticipate will be the demand going forward,” he said.
Senior Chinese official heckled in Wuhan
A top Chinese official visiting Wuhan was heckled by residents who yelled “fake, fake, everything is fake” as she inspected the work of a neighbourhood committee charged with taking care of quarantined residents. Vice-premier Sun Chunlan, one of the most senior government officials, visited communities that have been locked down since 12 February and video of the apparent heckling were shared online, including by state media outlets. It prompted observers to suggest that official media may have been trying to co-opt discussion of the videos and provide their own narrative of events. Also on Friday it was announced that there were 143 more cases in China and 30 new deaths, 29 of them in Hubei.
South Korea-Japan row over virus
Seoul has accused Tokyo of “unreasonable, excessive and extremely regrettable” actions, after Japan said it would quarantine all passengers arriving from its western neighbour. From Saturday, anyone arriving in Japan from South Korea will be placed in two weeks’ quarantine at government-designated sites. South Korea’s national security council said it would consider countermeasures against Tokyo. Relations between South Korea, which has the most Covid-19 infections outside China, and former colonial ruler Japan are already under strain by a dispute over wartime labour that has spilled into trade.
Sydney school closed
In Australia’s biggest city, Sydney, a school (Epping Boy’s High) on the city’s north shore, was closed after a 16-year-old student was diagnosed with Covid-19. Australia has also set up a national Indigenous advisory group to fast-track an emergency response plan for Aboriginal communities that are among the most vulnerable to any potential spread of Covid-19.
Coronavirus could knock $211bn off Asia-Pacific economies
A fast spreading coronavirus outbreak could knock $211 billion off the combined economies of the Asia-Pacific, with Japan, Hong Kong, Singapore and Australia among the most exposed, S&P Global Ratings said on Friday. S&P cut its 2020 growth forecast for China to 4.8% from previous estimate of 5.7%. On Thursday the Dow Jones fell nearly 1,000 points, and markets in Europe are expected to react badly on opening.
Europe toll mounts
Italy death toll from the outbreak has risen to 148, with 3,858 infections. The French president Emmanuel Macron has said a coronavirus epidemic is “inevitable” in France. There are 423 infections and seven people have died. The UK announced its first death from the virus as confirmed cases rise past 115.


Topics



Coronavirus outbreak




Coronavirus: at a glance






China




South Korea




Japan






Share on Facebook






Share on Twitter






Share via Email






Share on LinkedIn






Share on Pinterest






Share on WhatsApp






Share on Messenger








Reuse this content




 