Four more Britons evacuated from cruise ship test positive for coronavirus

Four cruise ship passengers who were flown back to the UK via Japan this weekend have tested positive for coronavirus.
The confirmation they have contracted the virus brings the number of people with Covid-19 in the UK up to 13.
England’s chief medical officer, Prof Chris Whitty, said the patients caught the virus onboard the Diamond Princess. The cruise ship had been held for more than two weeks off the coast of Japan.
The patients are being transferred from Arrowe Park hospital in Wirral, Merseyside, to specialist NHS infection centres.
A spokesperson for the Department of Health said “a full infectious disease risk assessment” was done before Saturday’s flight back from Japan and stressed that no one who boarded the flight had displayed any symptoms of the virus.
A total of 32 passengers – 30 British and two Irish citizens – were taken to the Arrowe Park hospital after their plane touched down in England.
Janelle Holmes, chief executive at Wirral University Teaching Hospital, reassured staff that the hospital was “running as usual.”
“When guests arrived yesterday evening, we followed clear guidance in relation to infection prevention control. This was to minimise the chance of any infection spreading,” she said.



What is coronavirus and what should I do if I have symptoms?







Read more





A number of other UK nationals who were onboard the Diamond Princess were evacuated to Australia. They included Northern Irish singer Rebecca Harkin who was part of the music entertainment team.
Harkin, who is from Derry but lives across the border in County Donegal, said she and her partner were healthy and safe but would remain in Australia for the next two weeks.
Q&A How can I protect myself and others from the coronavirus outbreak?  
 Show 
 Hide  
The World Health Organization is recommending that people take simple precautions to reduce exposure to and transmission of the coronavirus, for which there is no specific cure or vaccine.
The UN agency advises people to:
Frequently wash their hands with an alcohol-based hand rub or warm water and soap
Cover their mouth and nose with a flexed elbow or tissue when sneezing or coughing
Avoid close contact with anyone who has a fever or cough
Seek early medical help if they have a fever, cough and difficulty breathing, and share their travel history with healthcare providers
Many countries are now enforcing or recommending curfews or lockdowns. 
In the UK, NHS advice is that anyone with symptoms should stay at home for at least 7 days.
If you live with other people, they should stay at home for at least 14 days, to avoid spreading the infection outside the home.



Was this helpful?







Thank you for your feedback.

The news of four new coronavirus cases came as more than 100 Britons who had been flown back from China ended their two-week quarantine in Milton Keynes.
The evacuees had been kept in isolation at Kents Hill Park hotel and conference centre from 9 February. The British nationals and their family members were treated there after travelling on an evacuation flight from the Chinese city of Wuhan – the centre of the coronavirus outbreak.
One of the group allowed home on Sunday, Paul Walkinshaw, from Manchester, said he had been in China on holiday with his wife Lihong since the Chinese new year.
As he left the centre, Walkinshaw said: “Since we’ve been quarantined, we’ve been treated brilliantly. It was definitely hard at first (inside the quarantine) it is just one of those things.”
The 39-year-old praised the “friendly” staff and said he was looking forward to sleeping in his own bed again.
Matt Hancock , the health secretary, praised the evacuees “for their patience and perseverance” while NHS strategic incident director Prof Keith Willett thanked them for “the very responsible compliance they have shown”.


Topics



Coronavirus outbreak






Infectious diseases




news






Share on Facebook






Share on Twitter






Share via Email






Share on LinkedIn






Share on Pinterest






Share on WhatsApp






Share on Messenger








Reuse this content




 