Coronavirus: Australian infections rise to over 250 as Vivid cancels but NRL matches continue

The Vivid Sydney light festival has been cancelled due to measures put in place to limit public gatherings to slow the spread of coronavirus, as the number of diagnoses in Australia continues to rise.
However, the NRL announced on Sunday it planned to continue the competition – without crowds – into round two despite the coronavirus pandemic. 



Coronavirus latest updates: all arrivals in Australia must self-isolate for 14 days, says PM







Read more





The number of new confirmed cases of Covid-19 in New South Wales rose by 22 in 24 hours to 134, with more than 250 cases nationally. In Victoria, the chief health officer, Brett Sutton, said eight new cases had been confirmed on Saturday, bringing the total number of cases in the state to 57.
In Tasmania, passengers and crew were barred from disembarking from a cruise ship that docked in Hobart.
The NSW tourism minister, Stuart Ayres, said the decision to cancel Vivid was made after recommendations from the federal government to limit non-essential gatherings of more than 500 people.
Vivid, now in its 11th year, was scheduled to run from 22 May to 13 June.
“Vivid Sydney is a bright star of Sydney’s event calendar so the decision to cancel was not taken lightly. As the event owner, we must follow the advice of health officials to ensure the health and safety of our citizens and everyone involved with Vivid Sydney,” Ayres said.
“We have taken the decision early in consideration of those planning to travel to Sydney for the festival, our commercial partners, artists, and volunteers so as to minimise the disruption and impact on them.
“We are currently working through the full implications of the cancellation and will provide further information and advice as soon as it’s available.”
In 2019, a record 2.4 million attended Vivid, bringing $172m into the NSW economy.
Ayres said the decision to cancel was “another body blow” for the tourism industry, which has already endured challenges as a result of the bushfire crisis.
In NSW an additional 22 people were diagnosed with Covid-19 between 11am on Saturday and 11am on Sunday, NSW Health said in a statement.
The new cases include three people who recently returned from the United States, one who had returned from Singapore and another from the Philippines. Five people caught the infection after contact with other confirmed cases of COVID-19.
The source for the remainder of the 22 new cases is under investigation, however two of those had also travelled overseas recently, including one to the United States.
NSW Health said of the 134 cases, 60 were acquired overseas while 38 were infected after contact with a confirmed case. The remaining were either unknown or under investigation.



From Vivid to the Wiggles: list of Australian events cancelled due to coronavirus







Read more





A further 1,924 cases in NSW were being investigated as possible Covid-19 cases while 20,511 people have been tested and cleared.
Meanwhile, the NRL announced on Sunday it planned to continue the competition into round two despite the coronavirus pandemic. New Zealand’s NRL’s team the Warriors will stay in Australia after travel restrictions were announced by the New Zealand prime minister, Jacinda Ardern.
The second round will go ahead as scheduled without crowds.
“In the interim we will continue round two. At this stage we will play round two and assess the situation,” the Australian Rugby League commission chairman, Peter V’landys, said.
In Hobart, passengers and crews were told not to leave a cruise ship that docked in the city on Saturday. About 1,400 passengers and staff aboard the MSC Magnifica were told they could not return to the ship if they disembarked, an MSC Cruises spokeswoman told the Mercury.



Coronavirus is first a health problem, second an economic one | Greg Jericho







Read more





No one on the ship has the illness but the captain made the call as a precaution to protect passengers’ health. The ship left Italy in early January before the coronavirus became a global concern.
Tasmania’s acting director of public health, Scott McKeown, said on Saturday the state now had its sixth confirmed case of Covid-19 after a woman in her 60s tested positive.
She was identified as a close contact of a previous Tasmanian case, who had recently travelled overseas, McKeown said on Sunday.
The woman and all the other five cases in Tasmania were in a stable condition and remained in isolation receiving medical care.
The state’s Public Health Services had identified and contacted the woman’s close contacts. These people will be required to self-quarantine for 14 days and receive daily follow-up from PHS staff.
The new cases in Victoria this weekend include six men and two women with ages ranging from their teens to 60s.
One is a student – a known contact of case 17, a teacher from CareyGrammar. The student was not at school during their infectious period. Theschool will remain closed until the holidays. And as a precaution, 12classmates will home-isolate.
Sutton said all cases were recovering at home in isolation. All had acquired the infection from either overseas or through close contact with known, confirmed cases of Covid-19.
At present, there remained only one case in Victoria that may have been acquired through community transmission.


Topics



Coronavirus outbreak






Sydney




New South Wales




Tasmania




Victoria




Infectious diseases




Hobart




news






Share on Facebook






Share on Twitter






Share via Email






Share on LinkedIn






Share on Pinterest






Share on WhatsApp






Share on Messenger








Reuse this content




 