Coronavirus: call to release UK immigration centre detainees

Lawyers and campaigners have called for hundreds immigration centres detainees to be released because of fears they will contract coronavirus while locked up.
The call is outlined in a letter from 10 organisations that advocate for migrants and human rights. It says that “there is a very real risk of an uncontrolled outbreak of Covid-19 in immigration detention”.
The letter comes as the BBC reported that the government was drawing up emergency plans to avoid disruption in England’s prisons. Its advice to prisons says inmates who have had contact with a known coronavirus patient should be isolated in single accommodation. Prison staff will be offered bonuses to cover shortages.
The BBC says it understands the government’s plans involve communicating regularly with inmates, making sure they can contact their families and providing books and magazines to those in isolation to alleviate boredom. It is unclear whether vulnerable prisoners may be released because of the particular health risks they face if they contract the coronavirus.
Q&A How can I protect myself and others from the coronavirus outbreak?  
 Show 
 Hide  
The World Health Organization is recommending that people take simple precautions to reduce exposure to and transmission of the coronavirus, for which there is no specific cure or vaccine.
The UN agency advises people to:
Frequently wash their hands with an alcohol-based hand rub or warm water and soap
Cover their mouth and nose with a flexed elbow or tissue when sneezing or coughing
Avoid close contact with anyone who has a fever or cough
Seek early medical help if they have a fever, cough and difficulty breathing, and share their travel history with healthcare providers
Many countries are now enforcing or recommending curfews or lockdowns. 
In the UK, NHS advice is that anyone with symptoms should stay at home for at least 7 days.
If you live with other people, they should stay at home for at least 14 days, to avoid spreading the infection outside the home.



Was this helpful?







Thank you for your feedback.

There are between 1,500 and 2,000 people detained in the UK’s seven immigration removal centres. The Home Office also runs two short-term holding centres.
The letter calls on the government to release all immigration detainees immediately in the interests of public health. “We are concerned that if the government does not act now detainees will continue to be held in close proximity in a high-risk environment, leading to a preventable spread of the virus and losses of life,” it says.
Bail For Immigration Detainees, Medical Justice, Detention Action, Right To Remain, Immigration Law Practitioners Association, Women for Refugee Women, Joint Council for the Welfare of Immigrants, Liberty, Migrants Organise and Medact signed the letter.
A legal challenge is also being prepared that will call for urgent Home Office action to suspend new detentions, halt many deportations and release anyone at an increased risk of serious illness or death if they contract the coronavirus. Lawyers are concerned that current detention policy not only increases the risks to those detained but also to the wider population.

The Home Office has said it will continue to deportpeople, but the suspension of a large number of flights may make removals increasingly difficult.
Some detainees with suspected coronavirus are being held in isolation at Colnbrook immigration removal centre near Heathrow.
One who ultimately tested negative raised concerns about infection control measures. They said: “My illness began with coughing and a high temperature, I felt pain in my whole body. I went to healthcare and told them I was feeling ill. Initially they did not put me in isolation and just told me to drink water. I was tested for coronavirus but had to wait five days for the results. I was very worried during that time. I don’t think detention centres are ready to tackle an outbreak of coronavirus.”
Bail For Immigration Detainees coordinated the letter to the home secretary. Its director, Celia Clarke, said: “Immigration detainees are deprived of their liberty in appalling conditions with inadequate access to healthcare. These create fertile conditions for the spread of coronavirus and we are very concerned that the situation in immigration detention could quickly reach a crisis point if the government does not immediately release people. People are held in immigration detention for purely administrative reasons and there is no reason they cannot be released.”
Bella Sankey, the director of Detention Action, which is bringing the legal challenge, said: “The Home Office’s detention centres warehouse hundreds in close proximity including those with physical vulnerabilities that put them at high risk should they contract coronavirus. As the UK braces itself for this pandemic and as borders close, we are demanding the Home Office take swift and bold action to release those detained and prevent a human catastrophe.”
A Home Office spokesperson said: “The health of people in Immigration Removal Centres is of the utmost importance and we have robust contingency plans and are following all Public Health England guidance. We remain committed to removing foreign national offenders or those who violate our immigration rules.There have been no recorded cases of coronavirus in immigration removal centres.
“Measures such as protective isolation will be considered to minimise the risk of Covid-19 spreading to vulnerable groups in the immigration detention estate. Basic hygiene is a key part of tackling coronavirus. Hand-washing facilities are available in all immigration removal centres and we are working closely with suppliers to ensure adequate supply of soap and cleaning materials.”


Topics



Coronavirus outbreak






Immigration and asylum




news






Share on Facebook






Share on Twitter






Share via Email






Share on LinkedIn






Share on Pinterest






Share on WhatsApp






Share on Messenger








Reuse this content




 