Coronavirus: Man arrested for 'failing to self-isolate' on Isle of Man

A 26-year-old on the Isle of Man has been arrested for allegedly failing to self-isolate against coronavirus.
The man was held by police on the island on Thursday, two days after the self-governing British crown dependency announced strict measures to prevent the illness spreading.
Since Tuesday night, anyone arriving on the island is subject to 14 days of self-isolation even if they do not have symptoms of the virus. It is thought the man had just arrived on the island on a ferry.
The man, who has not been named, will appear in court in Douglas, the island’s capital, on Friday. He faces a fine of up to £10,000 and a possible three-month jail sentence.
Earlier on Friday, the Manx government confirmed the island’s first case of coronavirus. A spokesperson for the island’s public health team confirmed that the person had recently returned from a trip to Spain.
So far, 52 people have been tested for the virus on the Isle of Man, which has a population of 85,000. The island’s population has an average age of 44.4, compared with 40.5 in the UK.
Implementing its tight quarantine rules on Monday, the Isle of Man’s chief minister, Howard Quayle, said: “We are taking action to protect our residents and to ensure life can continue as normal as possible during this unpredictable time.
“We are advising against all non-essential travel off the island, and the measures being introduced from tomorrow are aimed at minimising the risk of those arriving in the island infecting our population.”
For those already on the island, anyone displaying symptoms including a persistent cough or fever, or anyone living with someone who has symptoms of the virus, must also self-isolate for two weeks.
The island’s schools and businesses are still open, and there are no restrictions on public gatherings, but the government has urged people to take extra precautions if they are in an at-risk category.
In the UK, there are no active measures at present to enforce self-isolation, and guidance on self-isolation is less trenchant.
Anyone displaying symptoms has been advised to stay at home for at least seven days from when they started. Those in households with multiple people must self-isolate for 14 days.
The guidance for travellers is that only those who have returned from affected areas should self-isolate; they must do this even if they do not have symptoms of the virus.
However, on Thursday, the health secretary, Matt Hancock, announced new legislation which would give powers to law enforcement agencies to curb the spread of the virus. Under the bill, police and immigration officials would be able to place people in “appropriate isolation facilities”.
The Manx health service has an agreement with the UK whereby patients are flown over for treatment they cannot get on the island, but this could be made difficult if the NHS becomes overwhelmed.
The island’s economy, which relies heavily on tourism, has already been hit by the pandemic, with people working in the hospitality sector losing their jobs because of holiday cancellations.
The 2020 Isle of Man TT – which attracted 46,000 people to the island last year – has been cancelled because of concerns about the spread of coronavirus. 


Topics



Coronavirus outbreak






Isle of Man




news






Share on Facebook






Share on Twitter






Share via Email






Share on LinkedIn






Share on Pinterest






Share on WhatsApp






Share on Messenger








Reuse this content




 