Dogs working from home during coronavirus crisis? There's an Instagram account for that

These stories are designed to offer practical advice, provide some entertainment, foster a sense of social cohesion, and remind people of the good in the world during these strange and isolating times.
An errant ear appearing in the bottom right corner of the screen. A blur of fur flashing in the background, followed by a crash. The chance to check out our colleagues’ pets during video conferences can be a voyeuristic joy for workers stuck at home during the novel coronavirus pandemic.
It took Mark Polchleb, a brand manager from Melbourne, just one day to realise that experience deserved its own home online. “I just took advantage of the fact that my dogs are at my feet. I thought ‘we all need a bit of happiness in our lives right now’.”















View this post on Instagram



















 “If I stand like this long enough, she’ll assume this is how hard I work every day she’s not here” - @thecuriousmaxx
A post shared by  Dogs Working From Home (@dogsworkingfromhome) on Mar 17, 2020 at 4:38pm PDT


That bit of happiness became @DogsWorkingFromHome, an Instagram account dedicated to the pets that both enliven and complicate working remotely. “I think we’ve all experienced trying to type on the keyboard with the dog edging its head into your hands,” he says.















View this post on Instagram



















 9am > 1pm > 3pm - We hear you, Orlando. This work stuff is ruff.
A post shared by  Dogs Working From Home (@dogsworkingfromhome) on Mar 17, 2020 at 8:24pm PDT


Polchleb is no stranger to Instagramming his pets. The dachshunds he co-parents with his husband, Billie and Ollie, had already amassed a few thousand followers. “They’re used to this fame world and so now they’re creating a community of friends,” Polchleb says.















View this post on Instagram



















 Are you one of us @dogsworkingfromhome with their hoomans all of a sudden? My dads want to share all your pics, so follow their page and send ‘em your best. Time for me to boot up the computer for another day. - O <U+0001F43E>
A post shared by  Billie & Ollie Mini Dachshunds (@billieandollie) on Mar 17, 2020 at 1:39pm PDT


Thanks to a callout on Billie and Ollie’s account, Polchleb says he has had hundreds of submissions to the account on its first day live. Now it has become more of a distraction than his actual dogs. “It’s hard to balance [posting] and actually working, so my husband’s helping out now … so there’s a constant feed of happiness for everyone to enjoy.”















View this post on Instagram



















 Maggie has things down pat and has scored the best seat in the house. Frida is still getting the hang of things.
A post shared by  Dogs Working From Home (@dogsworkingfromhome) on Mar 17, 2020 at 1:56pm PDT


His favourite submission so far has been from Hazel Yeoh, a Singaporean woman with seven rescue dogs in her house.















View this post on Instagram



















 Alright, who’s taking the meeting minutes today? It’s roll-call time for Lucky, Tonic, Kim Tan, Flubby, Pugsley, Ginny and Maria... oh and dog-mom @hazelnuttini
A post shared by  Dogs Working From Home (@dogsworkingfromhome) on Mar 17, 2020 at 8:40pm PDT


Right now, the account only has one rule. “[The dogs] definitely need to be at home. Obviously we’re at a time where we’re encouraging people to stay at home and indoors. We’ve had people submitting dogs at cafes, which is a big ‘no-no’ from me. We want to see those doggos at home with their families where everyone should be staying for now.















View this post on Instagram



















 The “That Zoom Meeting could have been an email” mood.
A post shared by  Dogs Working From Home (@dogsworkingfromhome) on Mar 17, 2020 at 2:09pm PDT


“Apart from that,” he says, “as long as they’re cute and can make us smile then we’ll take anything.”


Topics



Pets




The good place






Instagram




Australian lifestyle




features






Share on Facebook






Share on Twitter






Share via Email






Share on LinkedIn






Share on Pinterest






Share on WhatsApp






Share on Messenger








Reuse this content




 