'Scaremongering' ads for face masks banned by UK regulator

The Advertising Standards Authority (ASA) has banned a series of “alarmist” and “scaremongering” ads for face masks that it said played on people’s fears over the coronavirus outbreak.
In rulings published on Wednesday, the regulator found that online ads from two companies breached its code and were misleading, irresponsible and “likely to cause fear without reasonable justification”.
Quick guide What are coronavirus symptoms and should I go to a doctor?  
 Show 
 Hide  


What is Covid-19?

It is caused by a member of the coronavirus family that has never been encountered before. Like other coronaviruses, it has come from animals.



What are the symptoms this coronavirus causes?

The virus can cause pneumonia-like symptoms. Those who have fallen ill are reported to suffer coughs, fever and breathing difficulties.
In the UK, the National Heath Service has defined the symptoms as:
a high temperature - you feel hot to touch on your chest or back
a new continuous cough - this means you've started coughing repeatedly



Should I go to the doctor if I have a cough?

Medical advice varies around the world - with many countries imposing travel bans and lockdowns to try and prevent the spread of the virus. In many place people are being told to stay at home rather than visit a doctor of hospital in person. Check with your local authorities.
In the UK, NHS advice is that anyone with symptoms should stay at home for at least 7 days. If you live with other people, they should stay at home for at least 14 days, to avoid spreading the infection outside the home.



Is the virus being transmitted from one person to another?

Yes. China’s national health commission confirmed human-to-human transmission in January.



How many people have been affected?

China’s national health commission confirmed human-to-human transmission in January. As of 19 March, more than 219,000 people have been infected in more than 150 countries, according to the Johns Hopkins University Center for Systems Science and Engineering.
There have been over 8,900 deaths globally. Just over 3,200 of those deaths have occurred in mainland China. Many of those who have died had underlying health conditions, which the coronavirus complicated.
More than 84,000 people are recorded as having recovered from the coronavirus.




Was this helpful?







Thank you for your feedback.

One advertiser, Novads OU, based in Tallinn, Estonia, ran display ads and webpages for an Oxybreath Pro face mask, which highlighted the death toll from the coronavirus outbreak and referred to a “growing sense of panic” before touting the mask’s “unparallelled [sic] protection.”
Another ad for the face mask, which appeared on the CNN website through the Outbrain network, linked to a webpage that claimed the virus was spreading at “the speed of light” and declared “peace of mind is priceless during this terrifying time” and urged people to buy the mask while it was still available.
Yet another ad appeared on the Scottish Sun website and linked to a webpage that resembled a news story. It warned that the “nano-tech” face mask was “selling out fast”.
Novads OU did not respond to the ASA’s inquiries about the adverts or its ruling that the ads should not appear again. The company’s UK telephone number was answered by a woman who identified as Sheila in Hong Kong, who said a representative from the firm would respond to the Guardian.
She said queries should also be made to an email address for a firm called Hyperstech.com. Neither provided a response.
The ASA also ruled against Easy Shopping 4 Home, a UK-based trader on Amazon marketplace, for promoting an “anti-coronavirus” respirator, a phrasing the regulator believed would exploit concerns about the virus.
The firm also failed to respond to the ASA’s inquiries. The Guardian did not receive a response from the company.
In both cases, the watchdog upheld the challenge that the companies’ adverts were “misleading, irresponsible and scaremongering”.
“We’ve banned these ads for face masks because the claims they made went against advice offered by the public health authority, Public Health England, and were therefore misleading,” said Matt Wilson at the ASA.
“They were also irresponsible because they were alarmist and played on people’s fears. PHE do not recommend the use of face masks as a means of protection from coronavirus.
“Our rulings don’t, and we’re not seeking to, comment more generally on the efficacy of face masks or the legitimate right for companies to sell them or people to wear them.”
The intervention came a week after Facebook banned ads for products that claimed to cure or prevent Covid-19, the disease caused by the new coronavirus, or which created a “sense of urgency” about the outbreak.
Face masks may offer some protection against the virus by forming a barrier against the larger droplets that infected people cough into the air. But exhaled droplets quickly shrink and virus particles are small enough to penetrate masks without high-specification filters.

One concern is that masks can give people a false sense of reassurance that leads them to be less vigilant on other hygiene measures, such as regular hand washing and not touching the eyes, nose or mouth.
The ASA has worked with Amazon and other platforms that carried the face mask ads to remove the pages and adverts from their networks.
The platforms were monitoring for similar adverts and taking action against them as necessary, Wilson said. They have also updated their policies in response to the latest advice from health authorities and off the back of the ASA rulings, he added.


Topics



Advertising






Health




Coronavirus outbreak




Infectious diseases




Advertising Standards Authority




Medical research




Microbiology




news






Share on Facebook






Share on Twitter






Share via Email






Share on LinkedIn






Share on Pinterest






Share on WhatsApp






Share on Messenger








Reuse this content




 