Coronavirus: what power does the Australian government have over you during crisis?

After the first human-to-human transmission of the novel coronavirus in Australia, the federal attorney general has made clear the government already has powers to detain people – against their will if necessary – to prevent the spread of the virus.
So what powers does the federal government have – whether you’re in Australia already or arriving at the border – to respond to the health crisis?
Human biosecurity control orders
Under changes made to the Biosecurity Act in 2015, government authorities designated by the chief medical officer can make a “human biosecurity control order” to require an individual to do or not do certain things.



Australian doctors brace for coronavirus outbreak as first two cases of community transmission confirmed







Read more





These include to:
Provide contact details
Regularly update an officer of their health status
Restrict movement by remaining at the individual’s place of residence for a specified period
Undergo decontamination
Provide body samples for diagnosis
Undertake treatment or receive a vaccination
To remain in Australia for up to 28 days; or
Be isolated at a medical facility
Authorities’ preference is that individuals consent to the control order, which is what occurred when Australians returning from Wuhan province stayed at Howard Springs and Christmas Island.
But if a person refuses there is a power for the director of human biosecurity – the chief medical officer – to compel them.
An individual must comply with an isolation measure or a traveller movement measure for the first 72 hours while a direction is being sought.
If an individual refuses to comply with a requirement to stay at a particular place or isolate themselves, there is a power for police to detain them.
On Tuesday the attorney general, Christian Porter, said it is “not inconceivable” that control orders could lead to detention if individuals refused control orders but this was intended as a “last resort”.



Australians can be detained under coronavirus biosecurity laws, attorney general says – politics live







Read more





He suggested the powers were most likely to be used to require people visiting sick relatives to undergo decontamination, to prevent them entering or exiting a medical clinic, or to answer questions at a hospital in the same way they do when entering or exiting Australia.
Human health response zones
In addition to powers to control individuals, there is a power to set a “human health response zones” to apply entry and exit requirements on everyone in a particular area.
Porter said if these powers are used to respond to coronavirus it would be the “first time ever” they have been used in Australia. The Diamond Princess was designated a human health zone.
“For the first time really at a mass level in Australia people might be required to give me information about who they’ve come in contact with at certain points in time,” he said.
Porter suggested places likely to be listed as human health response zones would include fever clinics “which are designed to help people recover from the acute fever that comes with coronavirus and people entering and leaving those zones could be subject to requirements that are [compulsory]”.
Porter told ABC Radio National this could “potentially” be applied to buildings, shopping centres and football stadiums although all designations require consultation between the chief health officer for the relevant state or territory and the director of biosecurity.
At the border
On Tuesday Porter explained that control orders have already been used for people attempting to enter Australia, where there is “a suspicion that they might have some ailments”.



Coronavirus is the Coalition's GFC – but will Morrison respond as Rudd did? | Greg Jericho







Read more





Detention powers under the Biosecurity Act are “actually used quite regularly at our borders, at airports”, he told Sky News.
Human biosecurity emergency
In addition to control orders, there are powers for the health minister enlivened by emergencies involving threats or harm to human health on a nationally significant scale, called human biosecurity emergencies.
These powers allow the minister to “determine any requirement that he or she is satisfied is necessary” to prevent entry or spread of a disease.
They are subject to safeguards that the requirement must be “likely to be effective”, is “appropriate and adapted” to its purpose and is “no more restrictive or intrusive than is required in the circumstances”.
Offences for failing to comply are punishable by five years in prison or 300 penalty units (about $63,000, indexed to inflation); the same penalties apply to failure to comply with a control order.
Civil liberties concerns
In a statement the Law Council president, Pauline Wright, said it “absolutely supports” action to keep Australians safe, but powers under the Biosecurity Act should be used “with the utmost caution” and “only … as a last resort”.
“The exceptional powers under the Act do not have the types of safeguards and independent oversight protections afforded to our law enforcement and security agencies’ exercise of coercive powers,” she said.
“While control orders in cases of infectious disease may be justified, there is no requirement for a person to actually be infected or for the officer to even reasonably believe or suspect that the person is infected, or may be infected, with a [listed human disease], before a control order can be made.”
Wright said orders can have a “significant impact upon a person’s liberty”, such as isolation or restricted movement.
“While the use of such a power may be necessary to limit the spread of potentially dangerous infectious diseases, the threshold for determining a [listed human disease] and then for imposing a control order needs to be carefully considered to ensure it achieves this purpose based on reasonable grounds.”


Topics



Coronavirus outbreak






Law (Australia)




Australian politics




Christian Porter




Coalition




Infectious diseases




Health




news






Share on Facebook






Share on Twitter






Share via Email






Share on LinkedIn






Share on Pinterest






Share on WhatsApp






Share on Messenger








Reuse this content




 