Coronavirus 5 March: at a glance

Key developments in the global coronavirus outbreak on Thursday include:
Global cases head towards 100,000
More than 96,500 people have been infected by Covid-19 across the world, and more than 3,300 have died, according to Reuters. A large majority of the deaths were in China, but alarm is growing in both Italy and Iran, where 107 people in each country have died.
First death from the coronavirus in the UK
A female patient in her 70s with underlying health conditions became the first to die of the virus in the UK. She was being treated by Royal Berkshire NHS trust and had previously been “in and out of hospital for non-coronavirus reasons”, but died after testing positive for the virus on Wednesday night.
Virus likely to significantly spread in the UK, PM warns
After the number of cases in the UK rose to 115, with at least eight of those newly infected not having been abroad, Boris Johnson’s spokesperson said that despite efforts to contain the outbreak it was “highly likely” it would spread significantly. Officials will now focus on accelerating “delay phase” preparations.
Daily virus geo updates reinstated after ‘fumble’
The British government swiftly reversed a controversial decision to withhold information about the geographical spread of the coronavirus following a 70% increase. Prof Chris Whitty, England’s chief medical officer, blamed a “communications fumble” as he announced updates would be delayed by 24 hours to allow for information to be verified.
11 confirmed deaths in US as Trump casts doubt on death rate
“Now, this is just my hunch,” the US president said after declaring that he believed the World Health Organization’s figure of 3.4% for the Covid-19 death rate was “false”. There are now 11 confirmed deaths in the US, and California has announced a state of emergency.
Greece follows Iran and Italy and closes schools
Universities and schools have been closed across Greece, while large public gatherings at theatres, cinemas, museums and sports events have been cancelled in three western regions. There are 31 confirmed infections so far, but officials expect a significant increase.
Mosques and churches closed in area of Bethlehem near hotel
The Palestinian ministry of health closed all places of worship in the vicinity of a hotel in the West Bank city of Bethlehem after a suspected case of coronavirus in the holy city.
Iran checkpoints to limit travel between major cities
Iranian authorities are to begin manning checkpoints to limit travel between major cities after more than 3,500 cases were confirmed in the country, along with 107 deaths.
Sporting events postponed, moved and cancelled
Uefa said the Euro 2020 football tournament, which is to be contested across the continent between 20 countries from June, remained under “constant scrutiny”, while Serie A games in Italy have been called off and the Swiss league, Japan’s J-League, South Korea’s K-League and China’s Super League all remain on hold.
Starbucks pauses use of reusable cups
The coffee chain said it would only use disposable cups at its North American outlets and has restricted all business-related air travel for its employees. The changes mean customers will not be able to bring their own cups, nor will drinks be served in mugs in the US and Canada.
Prepare for sustained community transmission, says WHO
In what could encourage more countries to take drastic precautions, the head of the WHO, Tedros Adhanom Ghebreyesus, told states that their actions now “determine the course of the outbreak in your country”.


Topics



Coronavirus outbreak




Coronavirus: at a glance






Infectious diseases




news






Share on Facebook






Share on Twitter






Share via Email






Share on LinkedIn






Share on Pinterest






Share on WhatsApp






Share on Messenger








Reuse this content




 