Tests, masks, beds: health workers grapple with shortages as coronavirus crisis grows

In San Francisco, hospital workers have erected plastic “surge tents” to add extra isolation space for incoming patients. In Chicago, Rush University hospital readied 40 negative-pressure rooms that keep infectious agents from leaking out, and prepared to convert an entire wing into a containment area in just two hours. And on the island of Oahu, Hawaii, doctors have postponed all non-essential surgeries to free up ventilators and bed space.
Hospitals across the US are readying for a surge in critically ill patients as the coronavirus continues to spread. But many fear that even the drastic measures now being taken may not be enough. Doctors, nurses and other healthcare workers who spoke with the Guardian have described shortages of crucial testing supplies and protective equipment, while others expressed concerns about inadequate training or understaffed facilities.



Life under 'shelter in place': long lines, empty roads, panic-buying cannabis







Read more





“What we’re all fearing is that in the next few days we’re going to see a huge uptick of very sick patients,” said Dr Jeanne Noble, who is managing the Covid-19 response for a University of California San Francisco hospital. Yet Noble says that at the hospital, one of the largest in the city, they are already close to running out of essential supplies such as the nasal swabs needed for tests, or the masks essential to protecting their workers. “That’s what’s keeping me up at night,” she says.
Noble says the fact that the federal government did not allow local medical facilities to do their own testing for the virus for nearly two months “crippled” her hospital’s ability to quickly triage patients, forcing it to “burn through” much of its stock of masks and protective equipment for doctors. She says that because of the test shortage, hospital staff have been forced to treat all respiratory patients as if they are infected. As a result, in one 24-hour period, they went through a three-month supply of N-95 masks.
“To try to keep our health workers from being quarantined [as a result of inadvertent exposure to coronavirus patients] we have to overuse our protective supplies,” she explains.


 
 

 
 Facebook 
 
 Twitter 
 
 Pinterest 


 Workers in protective gear operate a drive-through mobile testing center in New Rochelle, New York. Photograph: Spencer Platt/Getty Images
‘Worst-case scenario is we won’t have enough beds’
Coronavirus has already sickened hundreds in California and killed at least 11. But those numbers could rise dramatically, says Dr George Rutherford, a UCSF epidemiologist and infectious disease specialist, putting immense pressure on hospitals. Rutherford says it is reasonable to assume California alone could have a million cases, which could add 10,000 critically ill patients to the demand on the state’s already-crowded ICU beds, which number just 11,000.
“Worst-case scenario is we won’t have enough beds for people who need them,” he says, adding that he is especially concerned about the numbers of ventilators available, since Covid-19 affects the lungs and many critically ill patients are expected to need breathing support. But he is hopeful that the strong steps California counties are taking to keep people at home could help spread out the demand so it doesn’t all hit at once.

After a “sobering” meeting with state hospital officials, the California governor, Gavin Newsom, said on Tuesday that the state had pledged $1bn for healthcare support measures, including leasing two hospitals that are currently not in use and acquiring hundreds of hotel rooms, mobile homes and trailers. He put the state’s national guard units on alert for humanitarian assistance and called on the federal government to provide mobile hospitals, including navy hospital ships floating off the coast of California, to treat patients.
In New York, Governor Andrew Cuomo said the peak of the infections might not even hit for another 45 days and could overwhelm the state’s healthcare system. He said the state would need additional hospital beds to cope with the crisis and reiterated his call for federal assistance.
The current trajectory of the pandemic’s spread “is at a point that is unsustainable for our healthcare system”, he said.
Nasal swabs and face masks running low
Beyond a shortage of beds and ventilators for patients, healthcare workers expressed fears about the lack of protective gear available to keep themselves and others safe.
In Alabama, a pediatrician said the supply of protective masks in her office had run so low that she was forced to wash and reuse the same mask every day during her appointments with children, many of whom have coughs, fevers and runny noses.
The kids will probably be fine even if they have the coronavirus, she said, as children have so far rarely been severely affected by coronavirus. But she fears all it will take is one coughing kid to put her out of commission.
“I feel like I’m being wasted,” said the pediatrician, who asked not to be named to protect her job. “I’ve trained for this sort of situation all my life. I work so hard with these patients. But I don’t feel like [those running the healthcare establishment] care about us. They don’t care about protecting us.”


 
 

 
 Facebook 
 
 Twitter 
 
 Pinterest 


 Health officials walk with supplies from a screening area for international arrivals in the terminal at Dulles international airport in Dulles, Virginia. Photograph: Andrew Caballero-Reynolds/AFP via Getty Images
The vice-president, Mike Pence, announced on Monday that the federal government planned to boost the supply of masks by allowing health workers to use construction-grade N-95 respirators, which are typically manufactured for building sites, not hospitals. Yet one of the main manufacturers of the masks, 3M, says it still doesn’t expect to be able to keep up with the demand.
“Even as we are increasing production, we still anticipate demand for respirators and other supplies needed for Covid-19 response to outpace supply for the foreseeable future,” said a 3M spokesperson in a statement on Tuesday.
Other crucial medical equipment is also in short supply. While a larger number of coronavirus test kits have become available in recent days, some of the standard laboratory ingredients, including chemicals called “reagents” that are needed to run the tests, are becoming scarce nationally.
“We are deeply concerned that as the number of tests increases dramatically over the coming weeks, clinical labs will be unable to deploy them without these critical components,” the American Society for Microbiology said in a statement last week. “Increased demand for testing has the potential to exhaust supplies needed to perform the testing itself.”
The long nasal swabs needed to conduct the tests are also running short, according to hospitals. “We are currently experiencing shortages of testing swabs,” said Dr Noble of UCSF, but she added that it had “not yet impacted our ability to perform tests”.
Newsom said he had spoken with Donald Trump on Tuesday and called on the president to repurpose the nation’s manufacturing sector to make things like swabs, which he said were desperately needed.
“We have a deep need for personnel and supplies: masks – even basic masks – and gloves,” Newsom said, adding that chemicals to run tests were running short. “Testing kits are like printers that you purchase, but you need to buy the ink for them. We have the tests, but right now we don’t have the supplies to use them.”


 
 

 
 Facebook 
 
 Twitter 
 
 Pinterest 


 Three tents are set up for a testing facility in a parking lot outside the University of Utah’s Sugar House health clinic in Salt Lake City. Photograph: George Frey/AFP via Getty Images
‘The pool of competent physicians has significantly declined’
Others worry about having enough adequately trained medical professionals.
Dr Hayato Mori, an orthopedic surgeon in Oahu, said hospitals in Hawaii have had to implement severe cost-cutting measures to remain profitable. They have cut staff and moved to using specialized doctors called “hospitalists” to manage unstable patients, so many doctors are no longer well versed in emergency treatment. It is a pattern that has been repeated in hospitals across the US, he says.
“The pool of competent physicians to help manage the influx of hundreds of severely ill patients in respiratory distress have significantly declined in our community,” said Mori.


 
 

 
 Facebook 
 
 Twitter 
 
 Pinterest 


 Sasha Cuttler performs a ‘flatten the curve’ dance move. Photograph: Courtesy Sasha Cuttler
In San Francisco, Sasha Cuttler, a department of public health nurse, is relieved to have been fitted weeks in advance for a mask that fits very securely to block out infectious agents. Cuttler has also been given extra training to join a team of six nurses that is visiting homes to test patients the department has identified as potentially having been exposed to coronavirus, but worries that many more people need to be trained and that equipment may soon run short.
“I hope it’s not too little too late,” said Cuttler, who has worked with tuberculosis patients in the past. “It takes a long time to train people.”
Despite the daily challenges, Cuttler is working to make the testing less scary for patients. For instance, while recently visiting families at home whose young children needed testing to rule out a possible coronavirus outbreak at school, Cuttler came up with fun ways to make the ordeal a little less grim.
After calling to alert families, “I pretended it was Halloween,” said Cuttler, who showed up covered head-to-toe with a blue mask, a face shield, a plastic yellow protective gown, booties and purple gloves. Cuttler has adopted the moniker Corona Queen 19 and even made up a “flatten the curve” dance move to perform for children, reaching out widely while doing a hip thrust.
“I have learned how to win the trust of the public with my dance,” Cuttler said. “I’m happy to report the children I tested have all tested negative.”


Topics



Coronavirus outbreak






California




US healthcare




features






Share on Facebook






Share on Twitter






Share via Email






Share on LinkedIn






Share on Pinterest






Share on WhatsApp






Share on Messenger








Reuse this content




 