'Of course I am worried': Chinese visitors to UK torn over coronavirus

On the train from Marylebone to Bicester Village train station a voice comes over the PA announcing in Mandarin that the train has arrived. Eager shoppers, a significant portion of them Chinese, make their way to the luxury outlet shopping destination nestled in the Oxfordshire countryside – many are wearing face masks.
As fear about the spread of the new coronavirus grows across the globe, Chinese tourists who have come to the UK hoping to enjoy sightseeing and shopping during the lunar new year holidays have had their trips overshadowed by fears for friends and family back home – and what awaits them on their return.
Making his way to the glitzy walkway that leads shoppers to Bicester Village, Sting Yao, 33, a manager in a media company, says at the moment his most pressing concern is the return to work. “We are safe in the UK, but I want to go back now,” he says. “When I go home I will be expected to stay at home for 15 days, when I have already been on holiday and I really need to get back to work.”
Quick guide What are coronavirus symptoms and should I go to a doctor?  
 Show 
 Hide  


What is Covid-19?

It is caused by a member of the coronavirus family that has never been encountered before. Like other coronaviruses, it has come from animals.



What are the symptoms this coronavirus causes?

The virus can cause pneumonia-like symptoms. Those who have fallen ill are reported to suffer coughs, fever and breathing difficulties.
In the UK, the National Heath Service has defined the symptoms as:
a high temperature - you feel hot to touch on your chest or back
a new continuous cough - this means you've started coughing repeatedly



Should I go to the doctor if I have a cough?

Medical advice varies around the world - with many countries imposing travel bans and lockdowns to try and prevent the spread of the virus. In many place people are being told to stay at home rather than visit a doctor of hospital in person. Check with your local authorities.
In the UK, NHS advice is that anyone with symptoms should stay at home for at least 7 days. If you live with other people, they should stay at home for at least 14 days, to avoid spreading the infection outside the home.



Is the virus being transmitted from one person to another?

Yes. China’s national health commission confirmed human-to-human transmission in January.



How many people have been affected?

China’s national health commission confirmed human-to-human transmission in January. As of 19 March, more than 219,000 people have been infected in more than 150 countries, according to the Johns Hopkins University Center for Systems Science and Engineering.
There have been over 8,900 deaths globally. Just over 3,200 of those deaths have occurred in mainland China. Many of those who have died had underlying health conditions, which the coronavirus complicated.
More than 84,000 people are recorded as having recovered from the coronavirus.




Was this helpful?







Thank you for your feedback.

Nonetheless he is determined to maximise his shopping time at Bicester Village, which is the second most popular tourist attraction for Chinese visitors to the UK after Buckingham Palace.
While Chinese tourists in masks is a common sight in normal times in popular tourist destinations, at Bicester Village this week there seems to be more Chinese visitors wearing them than not.
Kyu Hee, a Korean national with a Chinese husband who lives in the UK, has placed masks adorned with cute cartoon characters over the mouths of both of her children. “Of course I am worried,” she says. “This is the Chinese new year, so many people are leaving the country and lots of them are coming here. It is very popular.”
Her in-laws in China are “watching the news and staying home”, while the children in her family in Korea are not going to school until the Chinese holiday season is over and the holidaymakers have gone, she says.
Chao Chen, a paediatric ENT specialist, says his family’s holiday has been complicated by their return flights being cancelled. He had to rebook with another airline for an extra £1,000. While the family has been looking forward to the holiday for six months, it has been overshadowed by news from back home.
“It’s very terrible, we are checking the news all the time,” says the 39-year-old, who works in Shanghai. “I wondered to myself: should we have cancelled? Should we have gone straight back home? But I promised my son we would take him to the UK, so here we are.”
At Bicester Village no staff appear to be wearing face masks, but one shop assistant, who does not want to be named, says they have received assurances from their managers that they can leave their posts to wash their hands at any time. “I’m trying not to think about it, because when I do I start to panic,” she says. She is being slightly more cautious with customers, keeping more of a distance while “being professional”, she adds.
In a gleaming meeting room in the offices of Bicester Village, Miranda Markham, the community relations director, says the company is monitoring the situation “on an hourly basis” but at the moment it is very much “business as usual”.
“It’s calm, there is no question of any panic,” she says, adding that staff have been told to talk to their managers if they have any concerns. “It’s really important that we keep on welcoming our Chinese guests, particularly as they are having a really rough time in their own country at the moment.” On the impact of still more stringent travel restrictions from mainland China, she is pragmatic. “We haven’t seen a significant drop-off in numbers yet, but if there are further restrictions it will have an effect – but that will be the case for all tourist destinations.”
And that could be significant – VisitBritain estimates that for every 22 Chinese visitors to the UK, one job is created. In 2018 there were 391,000 visits from China to the UK, with visitors spending £657m. And it is a growth market: forward flight bookings from China to the UK have been showing growth of 27% for arrivals during the coming six months, says VisitBritain’s director, Patricia Yates.
“With the Chinese authorities suspending outbound travel, the Foreign Office advising against all but essential travel, and BA subsequently cancelling flights, there is an obvious and immediate knock-on impact for the tourism industry,” she says.
“The extent of the impact on the industry depends on the length of the suspension of travel. It is currently low season for trips from China to the UK, with only about 15% of holiday trips taking place from January to March, so we would hope for a subsequent surge in bookings when the suspension is over.”


Topics



Coronavirus outbreak






Infectious diseases




Health




China




features






Share on Facebook






Share on Twitter






Share via Email






Share on LinkedIn






Share on Pinterest






Share on WhatsApp






Share on Messenger








Reuse this content




 