Aboriginal people who work for dole told to attend group activities despite coronavirus risk

Aboriginal people who work for the dole will have to show up for group activities as usual, despite the government telling service providers that there is a “high likelihood that larger scale community outbreaks [of Covid-19] will occur in the near future”.
The National Indigenous Australians agency (NIAA) wrote to CDP (community development program) providers on Monday to tell them “mutual obligations remain in place at this stage”, meaning that Aboriginal people will still be expected to turn up for work or risk losing their welfare payments.
“Any changes for particular areas affected by coronavirus or other extenuating circumstances will be considered on a case-by-case basis in line with existing procedures,” the NIAA CEO, Ray Griggs, wrote in a letter obtained by Guardian Australia.



'The army is our friend' against coronavirus in remote communities, Aboriginal health group says







Read more





The letter said any CDP participant who is unwell and may have been in contact with someone who has been diagnosed with Covid-19 should call Centrelink to discuss obtaining a “major personal crisis exemption”, valid for 14 days, to “avoid any suspension of payment”.
“We are aware that some participants have expressed concerns about attending appointments or undertaking group-based activities. At this stage, the advice is that activities should continue as usual,” Griggs wrote, adding that CDP providers could “negotiate alternative activities”.
“If a site closure is warranted, the NIAA will deploy a streamlined approach to ensure this can be actioned quickly,” he wrote.
Labor is calling on the government to make sure that activity and mutual obligation requirements are suspended if necessary.
“People should not be put in harm’s way unnecessarily and proper risk assessments need to be done, particularly for remote communities in the CDP program,” Labor’s Indigenous Australians spokesperson, Linda Burney, said.



The government's coronavirus crisis approach is 'go late, go half-measures, and go to Hillsong' | Kevin Rudd







Read more





“There needs to be urgent communication with people about rules and exemptions – so people aren’t worried about what they need to do to get paid, and they can follow health advice where required,” she said.
But the minister for Indigenous Australians, Ken Wyatt, said “CDP activities play an important role in community life” and mutual obligation would stay in place for the time being.
“If a CDP participant is unable to meet their mutual obligation requirements because of illness they should call Centrelink who will provide a major personal crisis exemption from mutual obligation for 14 days,” a spokesman for the minister said.
“Any changes for particular areas affected by coronavirus or other extenuating circumstances will be considered on a case by case basis.
“This applies to all Australians who have mutual obligation requirements.”
The decision is in line with advice published by the Department of Health, the minister’s office said.
On Monday, Australia’s peak Aboriginal health group, representing hundreds of community-controlled health care services, called for state and territory governments to urgently protect Aboriginal people in remote areas, who are highly vulnerable to Covid-19.
The National Aboriginal Community Controlled Health Organisation (Naccho) said governments should consider deploying the army in remote areas, where health workers face major challenges in containing any outbreak, including a lack of access to equipment, testing and urgent emergency care.
“Everybody has to step up, that’s how serious this is,” the Naccho CEO, Pat Turner, said.
“State and territory governments need to do everything they can to stop this getting into our communities.
“If this gets into any remote community, there will be a high rate of deaths. Our communities will be devastated, because of the already low levels of health,” Turner said.


Topics



Indigenous Australians






Welfare




Coronavirus outbreak




Health




news






Share on Facebook






Share on Twitter






Share via Email






Share on LinkedIn






Share on Pinterest






Share on WhatsApp






Share on Messenger








Reuse this content




 