Infected NBA star: the scary part of coronavirus is that I have no symptoms

Donovan Mitchell, the Utah Jazz star who has tested positive for Covid-19, says the “scariest” part of his diagnosis is that he has no symptoms.
“I’m asymptomatic – I could walk down the street if it wasn’t public knowledge that I was sick, you wouldn’t know it,” Mitchell told Good Morning America on Monday. “I think that’s the scariest part about this virus, is that you may seem fine, be fine and you never know who you may be talking to who they’re going home to.”
The 23-year-old is in isolation but says he feels like he “could play in a seven-game series tomorrow”. He said the worst part of the illness was being tested. “It was a swab down my throat. It was about 15 seconds of probably the most discomfort I ever had. I ended up crying,” he said. “Tears came out of my eyes when they started going up in this area. It was definitely unique, but I’m glad I was able to get it.”

Good Morning America 
(@GMA)
EXCLUSIVE: “I think that’s the scariest part about this virus is that you may seem fine.” @NBA star @spidadmitchell speaks out for the first time from isolation since being diagnosed with COVID-19, despite being “asymptomatic.” https://t.co/i9rZzYvW4s pic.twitter.com/wZJBteQjtV

March 16, 2020

Mitchell’s teammate, Rudy Gobert, was the first NBA player to be diagnosed with the virus, which led to the suspension of the season. Gobert has been heavily criticised for touching microphones and reporters’ recording devices shortly before being diagnosed with the illness. He has since apologised and Mitchell admitted he had initially been angry with Gobert. “It took a while for me to kind of cool off and I read what he said and I heard what he said, so I’m glad he’s doing OK,” he said.




Play Video





1:00





 Utah Jazz's Rudy Gobert wishes he had taken coronavirus 'more seriously' – video
Mitchell said he had been playing video games and watching replays of old basketball games to pass the time. He is also working on a project to help underprivileged school children in Salt Lake City gain access to meals.
“For parents who may not have the money – being able to not send their kids off to school to get food, I think is a scary feeling for them and I want to be able to make sure that they’re set and they understand that guys like myself and whoever may have their back,” he said.


Topics



Utah Jazz






NBA




Coronavirus outbreak




Basketball




US sports




Infectious diseases




news






Share on Facebook






Share on Twitter






Share via Email






Share on LinkedIn






Share on Pinterest






Share on WhatsApp






Share on Messenger








Reuse this content




 