Coronavirus: BBC TV licence fee could starve over-75s of vital news, warns charity

The BBC is facing calls to delay the introduction of the licence fee for over-75s in order to ensure that those most at risk from the coronavirus outbreak are still able to access accurate information on the pandemic from their television if they are self-isolating.
However, letters have started arriving on doormats telling most over-75s that they will have to start paying the £157.50 fee from the beginning of June, around the time that cases of the illness are expected to peak. As a result, the charity Age UK has called for the policy to be delayed, amid concerns that some older viewers – who are most likely to rely on television news for their information – could choose to turn off their sets and cut themselves off from the world.
Caroline Abrahams, charity director at Age UK, said: “Covid-19 presents a real worry and risk to the health and wellbeing of older people. We would be pleased and relieved if the BBC delayed implementation of their plans to scrap free TV licences for most over-75s, and we are certain that older people would be too.
“Many older people tell us that they rely heavily on their TV for news and entertainment, particularly the lonely, chronically sick and disabled, so it’s more important than ever for the government and the BBC to come together and come to a sensible agreement that preserves free TV licences for our over-75s.”
The government is particularly keen to ensure that news broadcasters remain on air in order to get health messages to the public, with audiences flocking to traditional mainstream news outlets in search of accurate reliable information, pushing up ratings for television news and seeing record traffic to news websites. The BBC News website has seen its second biggest week for readership, with tens of millions of Britons accessing stories about the coronavirus.
While the decision in some countries to enter a full lockdown phase has seen talkshows in countries such as Italy ban studio audiences, British broadcasters have said they will continue to follow the government’s lead and not ban gatherings until advised otherwise.
As a result, they will continue to allow live studio audiences to attend recordings of programmes such as Question Time for the foreseeable future, as outlets work out how to cover the biggest global news story in decades without risking their own staff or the public.
Rachel Corp, the acting editor of ITV News, said her team would be “getting all our programmes out by any means”. In the most extreme circumstances, there is the option of moving ITV’s London-based national news programme to a regional studio, but the contingency planning assumes that up to 20% of staff could be ill at any one time.
She said viewers might notice some changes, with more interviews being conducted outside and microphones clipped to lapels being replaced with hand-held equipment in order to reduce contact between journalists and the individuals they are talking to.
“Even if you end up with very limited resources or a different style of programme, we want to get information out to the public,” Corp said, adding that the story was swamping all other coverage. “The markets crashed and we didn’t get to it until 23 minutes into the News at Ten.”
Radio stations are confident that they will be able to remain on air with ease, aided by improved broadcasting technology. Commercial group Bauer Radio said it had the capacity to broadcast shows remotely, pointing out that while its Magic Radio breakfast show host Ronan Keating was currently self-isolating after returning from Singapore, he has broadcast entire live episodes of his programme over a wifi connection using little more than an iPhone and a microphone.
The virus could be financially catastrophic for many companies in the already struggling media industry. Advertisers are already pulling promotions ahead of an expected economic downturn, while there is likely to be a substantial impact on print newspaper sales if readers self-isolate at home.
The risk of the pandemic sweeping the nation – and the political fallout from Boris Johnson’s refusal to ban public gatherings – has led to some companies taking views that differ from their editorial line. Staff at the Daily Mail’s parent company have been told in an internal email that “official government advice is no longer adequate enough to safeguard our staff”, with non-editorial staff told to work from home.
The line contrasts with the newspaper’s praise for Johnson and his scientific advisers. The publication’s editorial stated: “Striking the right tone at this press conference was not easy, but Boris and his boffins carried it off well. At this stage, we must trust their judgment and do as they say.”


Topics



BBC licence fee






BBC




Coronavirus outbreak




Question Time




news






Share on Facebook






Share on Twitter






Share via Email






Share on LinkedIn






Share on Pinterest






Share on WhatsApp






Share on Messenger








Reuse this content




 