Coronavirus: mass events and foreign travel should be cancelled, says Australian government

Non-essential gatherings of more than 500 people across Australia and non-essential travel overseas should be cancelled to halt the spread of coronavirus, federal and state governments have agreed.
On Friday the country’s chief medical officer, Brendan Murphy, and state and territory chief medical officers unanimously agreed that mass gatherings should be cancelled, a recommendation which was then adopted by the Council of Australian Governments (Coag) meeting in Parramatta.
Scott Morrison told reporters that “by Monday we will be advising against organised, non-essential gatherings of persons of 500 people or greater” as a “commonsense precaution to ensure we can manage the transmission of this virus in the most effective way possible”.



Flight Centre closes 100 stores in Australia as travel sector reels from coronavirus







Read more





Morrison said the recommendation would not apply to attendance at work, childcare, schools, university lectures, public transport, airports “or things of that nature”.
Australia would also ask its citizens to “reconsider your need to travel overseas at this time, regardless of your destination, age or health”, he said. “Only essential travel should be considered if you are going overseas from this point forward.”
The call came on a day when the Australian market tumbled as much as 8% in early trade but rallied strongly during the afternoon, surging as Morrison warned against mass gatherings to finish up 4.4% for the day.
Earlier, the Reserve Bank made a dramatic intervention in the markets in a bid to stop a credit crunch, pumping $8.8bn in short-term funding into the banks.
It did this by agreeing to buy assets such as portfolios of loans from the banks for cash, and then sell them back the same assets later on.
While the late rally erased losses experienced on Thursday, when the market dived 7.4%, the damage inflicted since coronavirus selling began on 20 February still means all gains since the start of last year have been wiped out.
Although Australia has “low rates” of infection, the prime minister said the government had escalated its response due to “growing evidence … [of] greater community transmission of the coronavirus throughout Australia”.
Murphy confirmed the decision was “exactly as decided” by the Australian Health Protection Principles Committee, composed of himself and the state and territory chief medical officers.
Murphy said the advice applied to a “static gathering where people are together for a period of perhaps up to two hours”, rather than aiming to prevent “casual exposure” of people transiting through spaces such as airports, which are of “lower risk”.
Morrison suggested that gatherings such as church services could be reconfigured by holding “multiple services at different periods” to comply with the guidance.
The Coag meeting agreed to convene a “national cabinet” consisting of state and territory ministers to meet weekly to manage the coronavirus and receive advice from the federal, state and territory chief medical officers.
“There are many measures that can be taken and the commonwealth government, together with the states, have already been taking to both contain and slow the transmission of the virus in Australia,” Morrison said.
“This is incredibly important because as we slow it, as we manage it, that ensures that … the health system run by states and territories will be able to accommodate the increasing demands we’d expect to see as a result of the coronavirus spread throughout Australia”.
The escalation of Australia’s response to the coronavirus follows a wave of cancellations of major events, including the Formula One Grand Prix in Melbourne, and growing pressure on major sporting codes to call off coming fixtures.
As early as Friday morning, Morrison and the Labor leader, Anthony Albanese, said they planned to attend the rugby league on Saturday, unless medical advice changed.
Morrison confirmed he still planned to attend, describing the advice against mass gatherings as an “arrangement we are putting in place for next week as a precaution” and saying “there is still every reason for calm”.
So far Australia has responded to the coronavirus with a $2.4bn health package to create 100 fever clinics and boost telehealth consultations and a $17.6bn stimulus package to prevent a major economic downturn.
On Thursday evening, Morrison gave a televised address setting out the response and attempting to reassure Australians that the government has “a clear plan”.
Albanese has criticised the government for being “too slow” to roll out a comprehensive public information campaign, in contrast to a controversial campaign about its bushfire response unveiled in January.



Formula One’s Australian Grand Prix cancelled amid coronavirus fears







Read more





Social-distancing measures have been enforced across the world. In Italy, the second-worst affected country after China, all retail shops have been closed, except for shops selling food or other essentials and pharmacies.
In France, schools – from nursery to university level – have been ordered closed, gatherings of more than 1000 people banned and visits to aged-care homes prohibited, given the vulnerability of elderly people to the virus.
US president Donald Trump has imposed a month-long ban on visitors to the US from all of Europe. In New York City, a state of emergency was declared, gatherings of more than 500 prohibited, and the Broadway theatre district shuttered for a month.
And in the Philippines, all schools have been closed, mass gathering suspended and public sector workers told to stay home, following a spike in cases across the archipelago nation.
Global sporting events have also been suspended. The ATP tennis tour has been cancelled for a minimum of six weeks. The US National Basketball Association has been suspended indefinitely. Football matches in Spain’s La Liga, Italy’s Serie A and the English Premier League have been suspended or postponed.
Australia has imposed travel bans on China, South Korea, Iran and Italy, and required Australians and permanent residents returning from those countries to self-isolate for a fortnight. It has not followed the US lead in imposing a ban on travel from Europe.
The Australian government has wide-ranging powers to control the spread of disease, including imposing “human biosecurity control orders” on individuals and declaring areas to be “human health response zones”.
Control orders would allow the chief medical officer and delegated authorities to restrict individuals’ movements, undertake testing or treatment or be isolated in a medical facility.
The attorney general, Christian Porter, has said it is “not inconceivable” that control orders could lead to detention if individuals refused to cooperate voluntarily, but this was intended as a “last resort”.
He suggested the powers were most likely to be used to require people visiting sick relatives to undergo decontamination, to prevent them entering or exiting a medical clinic, or to answer questions at a hospital in the same way they do when entering or exiting Australia.


Topics



Coronavirus outbreak






Australian politics




Scott Morrison




news






Share on Facebook






Share on Twitter






Share via Email






Share on LinkedIn






Share on Pinterest






Share on WhatsApp






Share on Messenger








Reuse this content




 