Australia to unveil $2.4bn coronavirus health package including pop-up fever clinics

Up to 100 new pop-up fever clinics, a $30m advertising campaign and a Medicare item for telehealth consultations will form part of a $2.4bn government health package aimed at slowing the spread of coronavirus.
The health response, to be unveiled by the Morrison government on Wednesday, comes as Australia recorded its 100th confirmed case of coronavirus, and as doctors criticised the “confusing” process that had seen patients queuing for hours at public hospitals to access a test for the Covid-19 virus.
The government is also finalising a “substantial” multifaceted economic stimulus package, expected to be detailed on Thursday, aimed at averting a widely tipped recession that could end Australia’s 29-year record of uninterrupted economic growth.
The prime minister, Scott Morrison, and health minister, Greg Hunt, will announce details of the health package on Wednesday, with the health sector to receive a $2.4bn funding injection to help cope with the looming crisis.



Australian government won't 'jump to a solution' to help casual workers in coronavirus crisis







Read more





A key part of the package will be $205m for up to 100 new pop-up fever clinics that will be located in areas of need, and which will test people who are concerned they may have the virus.
The aim is to divert people with mild or moderate symptoms away from hospital emergency departments and GP clinics to reduce the risk of the virus spreading. Severe cases will still present at hospitals.
Each of the slated clinics, to be staffed by GPs and nurses, will be able to see up to 75 patients a day over six months, with the potential of testing up to a million individuals within the next six months.
Some of the new clinics will be established in existing practices, while others will be set up as standalone pop-up centres, with existing clinics to receive an initial $150,000 to set up and to help offset losses from normal business.
While the government has indicated a pandemic is likely, efforts have so far been aimed at slowing the spread of the virus to allow the health system to cope with an expected surge in demand. Authorities are warning the spread of the disease could peak as early as May, ahead of the normal winter flu season.
Today’s package will also include a new Medicare item to allow doctors to charge for phone or video consultations for people with coronavirus symptoms who remain at home in self-isolation and quarantine, costing $100m for the next six months.
The service, which will start on Friday, is aimed at reducing the risk of exposure to others in the community and will be fully bulk billed.
It will be made available to people isolating themselves at home on the advice of a medical practitioner or the guidance of the chief medical officer, and those who meet the “protocol criteria” for suspected infection based on advice from coronavirus hotline numbers or other trained staff.




Play Video





1:41





 Australia's chief medical officer urges calm and says coronavirus is a very mild illness – video
Vulnerable groups, including those aged over 70, Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander people aged over 50, those with chronic health conditions, parents with new babies and people who are pregnant, will also be able to use the service.
Any doctor forced into home isolation or quarantine will be able to continue providing services to their patients via telehealth, “as long as they have the capacity to provide services safely and in accordance with normal professional standards from home or other isolation area”.
The funding boost will be accompanied by a national $30m communications campaign, expected to start within days, that will have information to “prevent and mitigate the impacts of coronavirus”.
Morrison said the package, which also includes a $500m hospital funding package already announced for the states, would ensure Australia was as well prepared “as any country in the world” to respond to the virus threat.
“We’re ensuring our health system is well-prepared and has the resources it needs for our fight against coronavirus,” Morrison said, ahead of Wednesday’s announcement.
“Our medical experts have been preparing for an event like this for years and this is the next step up in Australia’s plan.”



Morrison warns coronavirus hit could be worse than GFC amid recession predictions







Read more





The health minister, Greg Hunt, said the government’s focus was on ensuring the capacity of the health system to be able to effectively assess, diagnose and treat people with the virus in a way that minimised the spread of the disease in the community.
“We are ensuring people can access essential care in a way that reduces their potential exposure to infection,” he said.
On Tuesday, the shadow health minister, Chris Bowen, said the telehealth rebate and a better testing process needed to be “urgent” priorities for the government, and also backed the need for a comprehensive public information campaign.
He also called for the government to increase resources for pathology testing, a new information app, and for the government to respond to concerns from GPs about access to medical supplies such as face masks and protective equipment.
“Some doctors have said to me that they are getting enough support but many have said they’re not and really we cannot have any situation where a doctor feels they are not getting enough support,” Bowen said.
“We’ve given the government time, we’ve given the government constructive engagement but the time has now passed for discussion, we need to give GPs and healthcare professionals every support possible.”


Topics



Coronavirus outbreak






Health




Scott Morrison




Greg Hunt




Medicare Australia




Australian politics




Coalition




news






Share on Facebook






Share on Twitter






Share via Email






Share on LinkedIn






Share on Pinterest






Share on WhatsApp






Share on Messenger








Reuse this content




 