IOC rules out staging Tokyo Olympic Games behind closed doors

The International Olympic Committee has ruled out staging the Tokyo Games behind closed doors because insiders say that would be anathema to the philosophy of a movement that seeks to bring people across the globe together in celebration of sport.
Almost every major sport has shut down because of Covid-19 but the IOC and the Tokyo Organising Committee continue to maintain in public and private that the Games will go ahead in July. An IOC executive board meeting will take place on Tuesday but it is understood a postponement is not on the agenda.
While the IOC’s approach has drawn criticism, those with knowledge of the situation say it wants to give athletes every chance to compete in Tokyo and believes there is no need to make a quick decision regarding postponement given the opening ceremony is four months away.



Golf's US PGA Championship to follow Masters in being postponed







Read more





However, the Olympic boxing qualifying tournament in London has become the latest event to be cancelled. The organisers said the decision had been made owing to “growing concerns relating to the welfare of athletes, officials, staff and volunteers and amid the increasing global travel restrictions and quarantine measures which are impacting on their ability to return home.
“We are continuing to work closely with all the international teams and officials to assist with accommodation and travelling to ensure they can return from the UK.”
Some sports, including horse racing and snooker, are continuing behind closed doors but such an approach has already been rejected by the IOC. One source said: “It would go against everything we stand for. The Olympics is more than just a series of competitions, it is about bringing everyone together to celebrate sport.”
Another put it more bluntly: “An event with closed doors and no spectators is not an option.”
A major disruption to the Games’ scheduling would have serious consequences for sponsors, broadcasters, 11,000 Olympic and 4,400 Paralympic athletes, staff, airlines, hotels and volunteers and could saddle organisers with $1bn in lost ticket sales.
The IOC has accepted it will need to relax qualification standards so athletes who are on the borderline can be selected even if they are unable to compete in the coming months because of the pandemic.
Nearly 60% of athletes have qualified but with qualifying events, including those for climbing, boxing, fencing and judo, having been cancelled or postponed, many athletes are worried about being left in the lurch.
Quick guide Boat Race cancelled  
 Show 
 Hide  

The Boat Race, scheduled for 29 March, has been cancelled, organisers have announced.
This year's event would have staged the 166th men's race and the 75th women's race between crews from Oxford and Cambridge universities.
A statement from The Boat Race Company Limited said: "As a result of the current situation with Covid-19, The Boat Race on 29th March has been cancelled. This decision is based entirely on our concern for the welfare of our crews, our spectators, our staff and volunteers." PA Media





 Photograph: Kirsty O’Connor/PA




Was this helpful?







Thank you for your feedback.

Dai Greene, the 2011 400m hurdles world champion, said there needs to be flexibility, otherwise “a lot of athletes will not be able to qualify for Tokyo – regardless of whether the Games will go ahead”.
Other British athletes, including the Olympic and world medal-winning sprinter Martyn Rooney and the 800m runner Guy Learmonth, support that view
The IOC is already looking at ways to house more athletes in Tokyo if the number increases. Olympic organisers have also held conference calls with individual sports to discuss how best to plan for the Games amid the Covid-19 outbreak.
The Japanese prime minister, Shinzo Abe, said on Monday he wanted the Olympics, which has cost at least $12bn and attracted more than $3bn in domestic sponsorship, to represent a worldvictory over coronavirus.
According to a telephone poll conducted by the Kyodo news agency, Abe’s fellow citizens are less optimistic, with 69% saying they did not think Tokyo would be able to host the Games as planned.


Topics



Tokyo Olympic Games 2020






International Olympic Committee




Olympic Games




Coronavirus outbreak




news






Share on Facebook






Share on Twitter






Share via Email






Share on LinkedIn






Share on Pinterest






Share on WhatsApp






Share on Messenger








Reuse this content




 