Experts question Bupa restrictions on family visits to care homes

Pressure is growing on care homes to close their doors to all family and friends despite updated government guidance, after Bupa said on Friday that it was advising against visits except in exceptional circumstances.
A spokesperson for Bupa, which runs 125 care homes for 6,500 residents, said: “We are continuing to keep our residents, relatives and staff safe and well, so are taking additional measures by minimising visits to our care homes.” 
The move comes as critics including the former health secretary Jeremy Hunt have expressed concern about the government’s decision to delay more drastic measures, suggesting it could lead to more people catching the virus.
“It’s extremely grave,” Hunt said. “We are in a national emergency … Many people will be very concerned [by the decision to keep schools open and not cancel large events].
“The other message … was that if we are to give people the care they need, when the worst hits us we need to ‘flatten the peak’ and spread the pressure on the NHS … I’m personally surprised that we’re still allowing external visits to care homes.”
But others have condemned the decision by Bupa and other care homes up and down the country as breaching residents’ human rights and putting their mental health at risk.
Judy Downey, the chair of the Relatives and Residents Association, said she was very worried by care homes closing their doors to visitors.
“We have tin-pot dictators telling people that they can’t visit their parents and partners based on something they have half-heard,” she said, adding she also knew of a woman who had been told by a nurse that she couldn’t visit her mother, who lives in her own home.
“Residents can get very distressed if their relatives stop visiting,” she added. “If you had the choice, at the end of your life, between not seeing your children or dying more quickly, which would you choose? I’d choose the latter.
“Just as importantly: it’s not legal to ban visits from friends and family,” she said. “Residents have a right to family and private life, the right to choose and the right to be visited.”
But Nadra Ahmed, chair of the National Care Association, said the measures were only being taken after discussions with residents, staff and families or friends. “Providers are taking these steps to protect the residents and staff. They are taking steps to increase communication options via telephones etc. The advice remains for relatives who do visit to ensure that they are free of the virus and to comply with precautionary processes.
“Care providers are working hard to mitigate the risks to the vulnerable people they care for and their workforce, but know that they cannot completely eradicate the risk as there will be circumstances under which families and friends will be enabled to visit,” she added.
Updated guidance for residential care, supported living and home care providers was issued by the government on Friday. It advised care home providers to review their visiting policy, by asking no one to visit who has suspected Covid-19 or is generally unwell, and by emphasising good hand hygiene for visitors. Contractors on site should be kept to a minimum.
But the review said care homes should also consider the wellbeing of residents, and the positive impact of seeing friends and family.
One person who works in a care home for the elderly, who did not want to disclose their name, told the Guardian they believed all care homes should close to all visitors. “The majority of residents are [in their] late 80s to 90s and are frail with underlying health conditions. They would not survive the virus.
“It only takes one unsuspecting person to carry it into the home. We already know that we could have it without knowing. Placing elderly people at risk is a safeguarding issue and the government are responsible for this.”
Hazel, whose 97-year-old mother is in a care home with severe dementia, added: “She’s extremely frail and extremely vulnerable. One coronavirus case could wipe out a dementia home … as a matter of safety I have stopped visiting the home, even though there’s no restrictions.”
But other relatives of care home residents are concerned by the restrictions. John, whose relative has dementia and is in their 90s, said: “They will be very anxious and will feel abandoned without being able to understand why – it feels like a bereavement, and I don’t think I will see them again. I’m worried they may be so distressed they just give up.
“Closing their doors feels draconian and more in the care home’s interests than the residents’, and not compatible with government advice,” he added. “But I don’t dare complain because I feel it could rebound on my relative.”
Dr Lucy Series, a senior research fellow and lecturer in law at Cardiff University, said: “Care homes do not have legal authority to simply place residents in preventive isolation without some lawful authority, like the Mental Capacity Act 2005 deprivation of liberty safeguards. If they have no clear legal authority, and this is a blanket lock-down, this could potentially amount to an unlawful detention.
“Restricting access to visitors is also an interference with fundamental human rights to family life that would normally require some kind of clear policy to implement unless it is a very short-term measure,” added Series, who also holds a Wellcome society and ethics research fellowship.
Lawrence Gostin, a Fulbright fellow and law professor who specialises in public health law, said that while we must take “aggressive measures” to keep nursing home residents safe, “there is no legal authority and therefore there can and should be no lockdown. It should – and could – be accomplished on a voluntary basis.”
Other experts questioned whether severe restrictions on visitors would be effective, pointing out that the policy would bring its own risks.
Marion Shoard, an activist and author, said: “Barring visitors would leave homes free to operate largely outside the public gaze, increasing the chances of abuse of all kinds.
“In addition, by far the largest number of people entering a home on a daily basis from the outside world are the staff who, by the very nature of their work in helping with personal care, get close up to residents.”
• This article was amended on 16 March 2020. An earlier version was wrong to say that Bupa had “announced” its new visitation policy.


Topics



Coronavirus outbreak






Social care




Care workers




news






Share on Facebook






Share on Twitter






Share via Email






Share on LinkedIn






Share on Pinterest






Share on WhatsApp






Share on Messenger








Reuse this content




 