Coronavirus: Washington state at center of US outbreak as 18 cases confirmed

 Washington state has found itself at the center of the US coronavirus outbreak with health officials on Monday confirming 18 cases, including six deaths, many of them linked to a nursing home in the Seattle area.
A man and a woman in their 70s, who had underlying health conditions and were residents of the Washington state nursing home Life Care Center of Kirkland, died on Sunday. A woman in her 80s, who was in critical condition, also died, along with a man in his 50s and a man in his 70s, who had underlying health conditions. It was not immediately clear if they were residents of Life Care. A man in his 40s, who had underlying conditions, also died. He had no connection to the center.
The facility has been under close watch after a resident and staff member tested positive for the virus on Saturday. The Life Care Center announced it would not allow visits from families, volunteers or vendors and was putting a hold on admissions.
Ellie Basham, the executive director, said in a statement on Monday that the facility was monitoring all residents and staff for a high temperature, cough and/or shortness of breath. Residents with these symptoms will be put in isolation.
Most coronavirus infections cause mild symptoms, but for some at a higher risk, including older people and those with chronic illness, it can cause more severe symptoms. Officials think the virus spreads mainly through coughs or sneezes.
All of the coronavirus deaths have occurred at the EvergreenHealth hospital in Kirkland. The hospital has had 10 confirmed cases of the virus, and they are waiting for results on 29 other people, according to Dr Ettore Palazzo, chief medical and quality officer for the hospital.
“We expect the number of cases will continue to increase in the coming days and weeks, and we’re taking this situation extremely seriously,” Dr Jeff Duchin, health officer for public health, Seattle and King county, said during a press conference on Monday. “The risk for all of us of becoming infected will be increasing, and although most of the cases will be mild or moderate, the infection can cause serious illness and there’s a potential for many people to become ill at the same time.”
He predicted that the state would probably see more cases of coronavirus than influenza over the coming weeks and months.



The end of the handshake: saying hello during the coronavirus outbreak







Read more





Researchers who analyzed the genomes of the infections believe a coronavirus case announced on Friday was probably descended from the first case in the state, according to the New York Times. That means the virus may have been transferred from person to person undetected for weeks.
Seventeen officials from the federal Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC) have come to the state to help with infection control, epidemiology, contact tracing and planning for the weeks ahead, explained Duchin.
King county, which includes Seattle, has the majority of these cases, and on Sunday the county executive, Dow Constantine, signed an emergency declaration, allowing officials to take such measures as authorizing overtime for employees fighting the virus.
The county is also in final negotiations to purchase a hotel for patients who need a place to recover and live temporarily in isolation, which is expected to be available for patients by the end of the week. They will also be setting up modular housing throughout King county to provide dozens more people, especially those who are homeless, with a place to stay and recover.
Dr Kathy Lofy, state health officer at the Washington state department of health, announced on Monday that the state’s public health laboratory could now test approximately 200 specimens a day and was able to keep up with all requests. An additional lab at the University of Washington in Seattle will start testing for the virus on Monday or Tuesday.
The first coronavirus death in the US was confirmed in Washington state on Saturday.


Topics



Coronavirus outbreak






Washington state




Infectious diseases




news






Share on Facebook






Share on Twitter






Share via Email






Share on LinkedIn






Share on Pinterest






Share on WhatsApp






Share on Messenger








Reuse this content




 