Coronavirus: Australians stranded in Wuhan fear they have been 'swept under the carpet'

Australians stranded in the city of Wuhan said they were being “swept under the carpet” after the Australian government announced it might not conduct a third evacuation flight.
Two Australian-operated flights, and one in cooperation with New Zealand, have airlifted more than 500 Australians out of the Chinese city where the novel coronavirus emerged.
In January the government said there were about 600 Australians in the city who had asked for help, and it was prioritising the “isolated and vulnerable”, including young children and the elderly.
But those left behind said there are still elderly citizens in Wuhan, some of whom need medicine, while other younger, healthy Australians have been evacuated.
Desmond Lim, of Sydney, said his wife, Jing Gong, who is also an Australian citizen, had visited her parents in Wuhan for a week over the Chinese new year, when the city went into lockdown.



Coronavirus: journalist missing in Wuhan as anger towards Chinese authorities grows







Read more





“She has been there for 25 days now,” he said.
“We are appreciative and supportive of the fact that the government is flying the most vulnerable people out first. We want to do the right thing.
“We appreciate the triaging – but there there is no information around how things have been triaged. We were honest. We said she is safe, she is healthy at the moment. My wife’s there with her mum and dad. But it doesn’t mean we don’t want any assistance.
“Earlier I said we need to push harder. She said: ‘No, no, we need to trust the process, we need to trust the government.’ My wife wrote a really balanced email to the department of foreign affairs last week. We said we are really supportive of the most vulnerable people being flown out first, we completely understand. But we are getting really worried.
“I feel we are being penalised for doing the right thing. You do the right thing, you follow the process and at the end of it, they say: ‘Nah, we’re not going to help.’ ”
Lim, 45, said he was worried about Gong, 43.
“I lost my first wife to cancer and she has been my hope again – I thought I would die alone,” he said. “It has been extremely challenging, probably more for me than her, because of the frustration.”
Chloe Yu, an Australian citizen from Melbourne, said she knew of elderly people who had not been evacuated from Wuhan, and people her age who had been.
“I understand those people [on the first flights] need more help than me,” she told Guardian Australia. “I am fine to be the last one to be evacuated.
“But as far as I know there are young, healthy people being evacuated as well. So I don’t know. How do they decide who is more vulnerable than others?
“There are people who also need help here. An elderly man reported he might run out of high blood pressure medication and stroke medication. But somehow he has not been picked on a flight either.”
Last week Daniel Ou Yang, 21, from Sydney, said he had been “kept in the dark”.
Ou Yang was evacuated from Wuhan on the flight coorganised with the New Zealand government, but many of his compatriots remain.



'A hard and sad decision': fleeing coronavirus in Wuhan for Christmas Island







Read more





“From the very beginning news and info regarding the evacuation has been really scarce,” Ou Yang said before he left.
Lim said Gong had “not received a single call from Dfat” yet, but was sent a short email saying “Australians should not rely on further assisted departure” and should monitor the Smartraveller website.
“My wife is a citizen,” he said. “I cannot believe our government is leaving people behind. In contrast, I saw a press report about the Singaporean government, where they said they will leave no citizen behind.
“The lack of communication has been extremely telling. The five lines we got felt like a standard general message. It basically lacks empathy, sympathy. It is just horrible.
“It feels a bit like they are trying to sweep the rest of us under the carpet and make the situation go away. It’s not the right thing to do.”
Yu said she called Dfat and was told she was not even on the waiting list for the second flight.
“I do feel disappointed and upset that my name was never included on the evacuation list,” she said. “I don’t think that’s fair. I’m Australian. I pay tax. I am facing the same kind of difficult situation here.
“This is not the Titanic where there are limited seats on a life boat. I don’t think three flights will exhaust the wealth and capacity of the Australian government. I think that should be fair. We are citizens. Why are we not entitled to the same thing?
The American government has evacuated 545 citizens and residents from Wuhan in three flights, and Japan has evacuated more than 700 in four flights.
The New Zealand government evacuated 98 New Zealanders, and also gave spare seats to people from 12 countries – including 35 from Australian, 17 from Timor Leste and 17 from Papua New Guinea.
The Singaporean government has evacuated 266 people in two flights. Singapore’s foreign affairs minister, Vivian Balakrishnan, said last Monday in parliament: “Rest assured that all Singaporeans that are overseas, we will not leave anyone behind. We will look out for you.”


Topics



Coronavirus outbreak






China




Asia Pacific




news






Share on Facebook






Share on Twitter






Share via Email






Share on LinkedIn






Share on Pinterest






Share on WhatsApp






Share on Messenger








Reuse this content




 