New Zealand plane carrying coronavirus evacuees from Wuhan lands in Auckland

A plane carrying almost 200 evacuees from the centre of the coronavirus outbreak in China has touched down in Auckland.
Just before 7am this morning 190 passengers from New Zealand, Australia, Britain and several Pacific nations boarded the flight, as well as two paramedics, a doctor and staff from the New Zealand ministry of foreign affairs and the ministry of health. It landed in Auckland shortly after 6pm.
No passengers on the plane were reported to be sick or showing any symptoms of the virus but one passenger was barred from boarding by Chinese authorities after pre-flight health screenings.



Coronavirus live updates: China deaths pass 490 as 10 test positive on cruise ship in Japan – latest news







Read more





The ministry of foreign affairs said there were 54 New Zealand citizens, 44 New Zealand permanent residents on Chinese passports, 23 Australian citizens and 12 Australian permanent residents on Chinese passports, eight Britons, 17 people from Timor Leste, 17 from Papua New Guinea, five Samoans, four Tongans, two Fijians, and four of other nationalities.
Some 60 passengers who had registered for flight did not arrive in time to catch it, the ministry said, and others had taken themselves off the flight manifest earlier in the day.
After landing, the New Zealanders and all other nationalities besides Australians will be transferred to Whangaparaoa air base north of Auckland where they will be held in isolation for two weeks. Wi-fi would be provided to allow some people to work remotely, while tutors would be provided for school-age children because it was important to establish a “sense of normality” as quickly as possible, the ministry said.
Ministry of foreign affairs and ministry of health staff onboard the evacuation flight will also go into quarantine.
The Australian passengers will be transferred directly to a plane bound for Christmas Island, a journey of 7,500km taking at least nine hours, where they will be quarantined.
New Zealand foreign minister Winston Peters said 
New Zealand was happy to help its neighbour out, but did not want to divert the Auckland-bound flight via Christmas Island.
“In every other respect it’s been a total picture of cooperation.”
So far no cases of coronavirus have been reported in New Zealand though a number of people have been held in isolation and tested for it. New Zealand followed the United States, Australia, and eight other countries in completely barring foreign travellers from China, despite the World Health Organisation – and Chinese officials – decrying such restrictions.
“We have been advised by health officials that while there are still a range of unknowns in the way the virus is being transmitted, we should take a precautionary approach and temporarily stop travel into New Zealand from mainland China,” Jacinda Ardern, New Zealand’s prime minister, told reporters.
The travel ban will be in place for 14 days and will be reviewed every 48 hours.
The New Zealand Human Right’s Commission say they are aware of rising racism against Chinese people since the outbreak of the virus, although no officials complaints have been made to the watchdog yet.
“Anxiety and fear should never be a reason to vilify any group,” the commission said in a Twitter post. “We caution all New Zealanders – do not let your fears turn into racism.”


Topics



New Zealand






Coronavirus outbreak




Asia Pacific




Infectious diseases




China






Share on Facebook






Share on Twitter






Share via Email






Share on LinkedIn






Share on Pinterest






Share on WhatsApp






Share on Messenger








Reuse this content




 