Coronavirus: aged care homes in Australia need audit of infectious disease protocols, advocates urge

Aged care advocates have urged the regulator to audit residential care homes on their infectious disease protocols in anticipation of coronavirus outbreaks.
The prime minister, Scott Morrison, has said authorities could “lock down aged care facilities” to protect vulnerable residents if an outbreak took place, as the number of confirmed cases in Australia reaches the mid-30s.
The elderly, particularly those who suffer from cardiovascular or respiratory diseases, are the group most at risk of serious illness or death from Covid-19.
“People who are dying are in their 70s, 80s and 90s with co-morbidities, and that pretty much defines the aged care population,” the chief executive of the Councils on the Ageing, Ian Yates, said.



Scott Morrison calls for calm as coronavirus prompts panic buying at supermarkets







Read more





Residential aged care facilities must have isolation and quarantine procedures to deal with ordinary infectious disease outbreaks, like flu and gastroenteritis. Yet Yates said winter flu seasons showed some were unable to contain outbreaks.
“We have a concern that in the past couple of years when we have had outbreaks of influenza we have seen providers that are not as protected as they should have been,” he said.
“The indications from previous flu seasons is that it’s a small minority, but even a small minority is obviously a concern.”
In the US, one person died and up to 50 are believed to have been infected in a coronavirus outbreak at a nursing home.
Yates wants the Aged Care Quality and Safety Commission to conduct “urgent” audits to ensure providers were equipped to stand up their infectious disease control plans.
“There needs to be a focus from the regulator on those providers that history tells us have characteristics that are more likely to result in an outbreak,” he said.
A commissioner, Janet Anderson, wrote to aged care providers on Monday telling them to “give a high priority to planning and being prepared for this scenario”.
Providers should be “vigilant in maintaining the highest possible standards for minimisation of infection-related risks” and adhere to the aged care quality standards. 



Coronavirus: panic buying Australians are 'really overreacting', experts warn







Read more





Health care staff, including aged care staff, who travel to a country flagged as high risk are required to self-isolate for 14 days upon their return to Australia before returning to work. Sick people are advised not to visit aged care homes.
Three of Australia’s largest providers of residential aged care – Bupa, Carinity and the Aveo Group – said they had strengthened preexisting infection control and prevention measures and were following advice from federal and state health departments.
Yates was also concerned about the risk of the infection being spread through at-home care services.
The federal aged care minister, Richard Colbeck, said the government would host a forum for the aged care sector on Friday.
“Aged care homes are expected to assess the risk of, and take steps to prevent, detect and control the spread of infections,” he said. “Infection management, such as isolating infectious consumers … minimises the risk of transmission.”
Morrison said federal authorities had been working with the aged care sector, Indigenous health providers and the disability sector to support those most vulnerable. The health minister, Greg Hunt, said the aged care sector was his “number one priority for this week”.
People with diabetes, hypertension, cardiovascular disease and chronic respiratory diseases like asthma are at greater risk of serious illness or death from Covid-19.
Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander people are 3.5 times more likely to have diabetes, 2.6 times more likely to smoke and have higher rates of chronic cardiovascular disease.
Prof Peter Wark, the National Asthma Council’s director, said overcrowded housing in some remote communities meant that if the virus did gain a foothold it could be devastating.
“If you got a case or outbreak in some of those areas you could very rapidly have transmission and you could have a very large group of very sick people in a short period of time,” he said.


Topics



Coronavirus outbreak






Aged care




Infectious diseases




Health




news






Share on Facebook






Share on Twitter






Share via Email






Share on LinkedIn






Share on Pinterest






Share on WhatsApp






Share on Messenger








Reuse this content




 