Wetherspoons boss says UK pubs will stay open as long as possible

The Wetherspoons boss, Tim Martin, has said closing pubs and bars won’t help stop coronavirus and vowed to keep his 867 UK pubs open as long as possible.
Amid reports that the government was about to order the closure of London pubs and restaurants, Martin said: “My instinct is that closure won’t save lives but will cost thousands of jobs and create unsustainable costs for the UK.
“I believe central London pubs and restaurants are extremely quiet but supermarkets are often very busy in the vicinity. There are still people out and about who would welcome a drink or meal and other facilities pubs and restaurants provide.
“As I understand it, Taiwan, Singapore and South Korea’s successful approach to the virus has not involved closure.”
About 120 Wetherspoons pubs are in London.
Martin also defended his right to issue public pronouncements on the best way to contain the outbreak, denying that weighing in on pandemic containment and keeping the chain’s pubs open were irresponsible.
He said: “Am I out of my depth? We’re a democracy, aren’t we? I’m obviously not an expert but I’ve got a view and that’s all I can say. People can accept it or not. Even if you’re not an epidemiologist you can look at what other countries do and weigh up what’s happened.
“More people have caught the virus in one building, parliament, than in all our pubs combined.”
Martin, who has previously issued lengthy diatribes on Brexit, maintained his defiant stance after releasing a statement this week saying the government would be wrong to prevent people visiting pubs and restaurants, and advocating “group immunity” as a strategy for the UK.
He said that people getting the virus early and becoming immune could be beneficial in the long term in dealing with any future spikes in cases.
“One of the cabinet, Nadine Dorries, has had the virus. She’s recovered now but having someone in the cabinet who’s resistant to it is a plus.”
So far the government has asked the population to stay away from pubs and bars, but is reportedly considering an outright ban in the capital, the centre of the UK’s outbreak.
Wetherspoons has said its UK pubs will stay open unless ordered otherwise, but with precautions in place, such as no standing at the bar, frequent surface wipedowns and customers being asked to sit far apart where possible.
The group’s seven pubs in Ireland are closed under a voluntary agreement with the country’s pubs trade body, while one of its UK pubs, in Enfield, had issued a “regulars only” rule to keep numbers down, said Martin.
He described the outlook for pubs as “fucking awful” but insisted it was survivable.
Visits to pubs have dropped dramatically since the government said people should avoid them, and the Wetherspoons boss warned that a long-term shutdown could be terminal for any company in the sector.
“Even if you’ve got the greatest pub company in the world, you depend on the doors being open. If they shut for long enough the entire hospitality industry, never mind Wetherspoons, we’ll be in serious trouble.”
Martin said 1,600 of his 43,000 staff were on sick pay because they were self-isolating, adding that he could not rule out job losses.
“I really can’t tell you at this moment. The advice from the prime minister has caused pub trade and restaurant trade to drop a lot. We’ll have to see in the next few weeks.”
He said Boris Johnson, who he backed in the Conservative leadership race, had taken a “reasonably sensible path” during the crisis so far.


Sign up to the daily Business Today email or follow Guardian Business on Twitter at @BusinessDesk
Martin was speaking as Wetherspoons announced another set of strong results for the six months to 26 January, a period before the pandemic took hold.
Sales were 4.9% higher at £933m, with pre-tax profits up 15% to £57.9m excluding one-off items that the company did not detail, but down 14% to £42m including them.
Martin said it was “impossible to provide realistic guidance” on performance in the rest of the year, given uncertainty over the length of the Covid-19 crisis.


Topics



JD Wetherspoon






Food & drink industry




Coronavirus outbreak




news






Share on Facebook






Share on Twitter






Share via Email






Share on LinkedIn






Share on Pinterest






Share on WhatsApp






Share on Messenger








Reuse this content




 