If the government wants schools to stay open as coronavirus hits, here's what we need | Jules White

It’s in every headteacher’s DNA to keep schools open whatever the challenge; but it’s also in our DNA to keep children and our colleagues safe.



Parents must be told why we should keep schools open, and why everyone must engage in social distancing – except schools

At times, the two goals are not easily compatible. The challenges now are magnified by a set of extraordinary events and a lack of joined-up government policies.
The current malaise is summed up by the conflicting strategies of keeping schools open while also telling people – including our staff – to look after their communities and self-isolate for at least 14 days at the first sign of coronavirus symptoms.
As we prepare to try and keep schools open, headteachers across the country are telling me there are major issues that require urgent attention. These include:
looking after the health and wellbeing of staff and students, especially those with serious underlying issues;
ensuring that basic safety standards on such things as fire, hygiene and security are maintained;
feeding large numbers of students, in particular those from very disadvantaged families;
 and managing myriad anxieties among colleagues, pupils and families.
Not every question can be answered by government, but many have to be and there is no time to waste. Headteachers are there to plan for difficult situations but we need some clarity and meaningful support too. There are severe contradictions associated with making compassionate and assured decisions, which frequently seem to fly in the face of common sense and wider government advice.
Moreover, Ofsted’s tone deaf approach in carrying on with inspections, while the Department for Education is silent on the matter, shows the remoteness of our political and operational masters.
Headteachers are all putting together contingency plans without having clear sight of an overall game plan. If the government tells us the plan and gives us the resources, we will do everything to achieve it. Give our stretched budgets emergency help as teacher supply costs soar. Let us know if we can ask staff to come into work if the risks are low.
Schools and parents must be told unequivocally why we should keep schools open and consider to allow just the children of key workers to attend. And, most importantly, why everyone must engage comprehensively in social distancing – apart, that is, from schools.
The government must provide practical help and direction too. Schools need more cleaners to complete regular hygiene work and deep cleans if there is a short-term closure. So give us access to agencies who must prioritise schools.
While we should do everything to get GCSEs and A-levels done when possible, Sats tests in primary schools should be abandoned in the current circumstances. We must also consider children of real disadvantage: schools are often their place of sanctuary and constancy.
Urgent help is required for children who have to deal with disability. Schools need emergency resources to help these most vulnerable young people, and now.



GCSEs and A-levels should be cancelled. Anything else will put lives at risk | Hamid Patel







Read more





There is not one headteacher in the UK who underestimates the challenges faced by our government, but there has been enough time for more joined-up thinking and intervention to protect and serve our schools.
There are estimates that school closures could cost the country 3% of GDP. Schools are actually more important even than this startling statistic: we are the bedrock of our communities.
The government must plan more effectively in supporting the crucial role that schools must play in the days and weeks ahead. They must provide the leadership to help every headteacher.
• Jules White is headteacher at Tanbridge House School, Horsham


Topics



Coronavirus outbreak




Opinion






Schools




comment






Share on Facebook






Share on Twitter






Share via Email






Share on LinkedIn






Share on Pinterest






Share on WhatsApp






Share on Messenger








Reuse this content




 