'I just want to go home': thousands of Australians stranded overseas amid coronavirus chaos

Thousands of Australians have been left stranded overseas as airlines cancel flights and countries across the globe shut their borders entirely in an effort to contain the spread of Covid-19.
Australians caught by closed borders, airport shutdowns, cancelled flights or soaring ticket prices say they are trying to heed the government’s advice to return home for the duration of the pandemic, but can’t.
At least 100 Australians are isolated in Peru after the government in Lima closed all borders and land crossings and stopped international flights in and out.
Australia’s Department of Foreign Affairs and Trade (Dfat) has advised all Australians to return home as soon as possible on commercial flights, but has conceded that for some getting back is currently impossible.



Coronavirus: travellers race home amid worldwide border closures and flight warnings







Read more





The Australian embassy in Lima is closed. In a note to Australians in Peru, Dfat said: “Movement is heavily restricted and Peru’s borders are closed. It is not possible to leave at this time.
“If you’re in Peru remain where you are. Follow the instructions of local authorities. Take care to minimise your risk of exposure to coronavirus.”
Amy Neilson, a Tasmanian doctor currently in Lima, said she was concerned about a lack of government guidance or assistance for stranded Australians. She said that she, along with others in Peru, were compiling a list of Australians in the country.
“I’m advised the Canadian embassy is trying to make a list of people in Peru on lockdown in the state of emergency. Why is Australia not doing this?” 
Neilson said she tried to get out of Peru days ago, but there were no flights available for days ahead.
“I have a flight booked for the 20th [of March] but it is unlikely to go ahead. Reports are that there are army/police at the airport and you can’t get in without a boarding pass. Also reports of people on floors with nowhere to go.
“People have come from the airport as no flights are leaving any more. People are reporting difficulty getting a taxi as movement is legally limited to the shops or doctors.”
Jorga Gec, an architect from Melbourne, told Guardian Australia there wasn’t enough time to get out of Peru.
“We woke up Monday morning to be told Peru were closing the borders at 11pm that day. We had a flight booked at 7am on Tuesday morning and a connecting flight out to Australia from Santiago, but it was too late.
“We spent most of the day at the airport trying to get a flight out. Hopeless – all flights were already booked out. We were hoping Latam [Airlines] would schedule more flights to help get people out, but they were cancelling flights.”
Other travellers in Peru have said their efforts to contact Dfat have failed, and with the embassy closed for 15 days there has been no official advice on what they should do. Some have even been unable to register their presence overseas with Dfat.
The Peruvian government has announced humanitarian charter flights – run by governments seeking to repatriate their citizens – would be available over the next few days. Guardian Australia has asked the office of the foreign minister whether there are plans to do the same for stranded Australians.
Late on Tuesday, the foreign minister, Marise Payne, said: “Transport options will likely become more limited as countries respond to the Covid-19 outbreak and Dfat’s capacity to provide consular help may be limited.”
On Wednesday, the department raised Australia’s travel advisory to its highest level: “regardless of your destination, age or health, our advice is do not travel at this time”.
Guardian Australia has been contacted by dozens of Australians caught overseas: in Kenya, India, Sri Lanka, Thailand, Laos, the US, UK, Germany, Portugal, Spain and Hungary, even en route to Antarctica, seeking passage home. 



British-Australian academic Kylie Moore-Gilbert not reported among prisoners freed among coronavirus fears







Read more





Thirty-six-year-old Michael de Wildt is trying to get from Watamu, north of Mombasa in Kenya, home to Melbourne.
“I feel like the Maze Runner because tomorrow I’m going to run a gauntlet: by taxi from Watamu to Mombasa, flight to Nairobi, flight to Dubai, flight to Melbourne, taxi to self-quarantine! Fingers crossed I remain Covid-19 free. If not and more importantly, I don’t infect others.”
Chris Selman, a 50-year-old engineer from Perth, is in Anchorage, Alaska, which is “about as far from home as it is possible to be”. He has struggled to change his flights, and has had no communication from airlines, spending more than four hours on hold before giving up.
He said the Australian government’s call for citizens to return was “sensible overall, but the suddenness is troubling and will place more strain on travel”.
“It would have been better to slowly ramp up the alert level over a few days. Makes us worried what they know and are not saying about coming border or airline closures and adds to the sense of panic and chaos.”
An Australian teacher in Laos, who wished to remain anonymous, said she was shocked to be told Australians have been advised to return home immediately.
“They say they aren’t going to close the [Australian] borders, but I am deeply suspicious and expect that might be the plan. I don’t think they are exaggerating the danger though, given the way the pandemic and the responses to the pandemic have unfolded around the world in the last few weeks. I am at the stage where I just want to go home and self-isolate for two weeks.”
There are also an estimated 300 Australian citizens and permanent residents, including young children separated from their parents, still in Wuhan, in Hubei province in central China, which was the original source of the virus and the first part of the world locked down. Many of these people, having missed spots on evacuation flights out of Wuhan, now say they feel safer in China, where the spread of the virus has been successfully mitigated.


Topics



Coronavirus outbreak






Infectious diseases




Peru




Alaska




Kenya




Laos




China




news






Share on Facebook






Share on Twitter






Share via Email






Share on LinkedIn






Share on Pinterest






Share on WhatsApp






Share on Messenger








Reuse this content




 