'Our worst nightmare':  UK family to be split up in coronavirus evacuations

A British family trapped in the centre of the coronavirus outbreak are facing their “worst nightmare” after being told wife and mother Sindy Siddle will not be allowed on the plane evacuating them from the country.
Siddle travelled to Hubei province with her husband, Jeff, and nine-year-old daughter, Jasmine, to spend lunar new year with her family in the village of Hongtu.
The UK Foreign Office (FCO) has told her that since she has a Chinese passport, she will not be allowed to board the plane evacuating British nationals in the next few days. 
China does not recognise dual nationality; any citizen who wants to get a passport from another country has to give up their Chinese one. Many people unofficially managed to hold two passports, by acquiring a second nationality without informing Chinese authorities. But in recent years, driven partly by an anti-corruption campaign, there have been greater official efforts to crack down on dual nationals.
A 42-year-old accounts assistant, Siddle has had a visa for permanent residency in the UK since 2008.
“My head is spinning. It’s just horrendous,” said Jeff Siddle, 54, an IT software developer. “This ordeal just turned into our worst nightmare … How can they put a family in this position? Having to leave Sindy in China would be the worst thing that anyone could be put through. How am I going to tell Jasmine that her mum has to stay behind?”
Sindy Siddle said she was devastated when she found out: “This is a very difficult time for us because my daughter is just nine years old and I don’t want to put her at risk staying here for a long time. But anything that can help my daughter get away we will try, so we made a decision that Jeff and Jasmine will go.
“I want to be with my family and look after them, especially my daughter, because I don’t know how to tell my daughter, you have to go without mum.”


 
 

 
 Facebook 
 
 Twitter 
 
 Pinterest 


 Sindy Siddle travelled to Hubei province to mark the lunar new year with her family in the village of Hongtu. Photograph: Supplied
The family, from Prudhoe, Northumberland, said there were no health warnings in place when they flew out on 15 January, but they have since become caught up in an outbreak which has claimed more than a hundred lives.
“There was no indication that there was any danger. It’s all just escalated since we arrived,” said Jeff.
The Siddles’ situation was echoed by another family. Natalie Francis, a 31-year-old kindergarten teacher from York, said she had been told her three-year-old son, who has a Chinese passport, would not qualify for evacuation.
The boy has British residency rights under the 1981 Nationality Act, but Francis said: “I finally got a phone call at 10am this morning from some man [at the Foreign Office] in London, who then went on to say that I qualify for evacuation, but they cannot take my son. And I said, ‘There’s like nothing you can do? I mean, I literally have a letter from you guys saying he is a British citizen.’
“They said anyone with Chinese nationality or other citizenship is not being allowed to go on. And then he went on to ask if I still want to go, and I’m like, ‘So yeah, you want me to just abandon my son in China, and go home?’
“He was probably just trying to do his job but it’s a ridiculous question.”

The Siddles are trapped in the village of Hongtu near Jingmen city, a three-hour drive from Wuhan, with no communication over the last few days from the British authorities in Wuhan and Beijing, which Jeff Siddle said had been closed for the lunar new year. Other British citizens in Wuhan have expressed frustration over the lack of clarity from the UK government.
“There hasn’t been a lot of help from the UK side at all,” he said. “The roads from our village are not allowing cars through, so we effectively can’t leave the village. We haven’t left the village for about four days now.”
The family finally received confirmation that a flight would be available for British nationals to leave the country in the next few days, but still face the task of making their way to Wuhan airport, 150 miles away, when most roads are closed.
The FCO said it would make a note on its file that Sindy is the mother of a British child, but could make no guarantees about her evacuation.
Quick guide What are coronavirus symptoms and should I go to a doctor?  
 Show 
 Hide  


What is Covid-19?

It is caused by a member of the coronavirus family that has never been encountered before. Like other coronaviruses, it has come from animals.



What are the symptoms this coronavirus causes?

The virus can cause pneumonia-like symptoms. Those who have fallen ill are reported to suffer coughs, fever and breathing difficulties.
In the UK, the National Heath Service has defined the symptoms as:
a high temperature - you feel hot to touch on your chest or back
a new continuous cough - this means you've started coughing repeatedly



Should I go to the doctor if I have a cough?

Medical advice varies around the world - with many countries imposing travel bans and lockdowns to try and prevent the spread of the virus. In many place people are being told to stay at home rather than visit a doctor of hospital in person. Check with your local authorities.
In the UK, NHS advice is that anyone with symptoms should stay at home for at least 7 days. If you live with other people, they should stay at home for at least 14 days, to avoid spreading the infection outside the home.



Is the virus being transmitted from one person to another?

Yes. China’s national health commission confirmed human-to-human transmission in January.



How many people have been affected?

China’s national health commission confirmed human-to-human transmission in January. As of 19 March, more than 219,000 people have been infected in more than 150 countries, according to the Johns Hopkins University Center for Systems Science and Engineering.
There have been over 8,900 deaths globally. Just over 3,200 of those deaths have occurred in mainland China. Many of those who have died had underlying health conditions, which the coronavirus complicated.
More than 84,000 people are recorded as having recovered from the coronavirus.




Was this helpful?







Thank you for your feedback.

A Downing Street spokesman said: “The Foreign Office is urgently exploring options for British nationals to leave Hubei province. Details are being finalised, and the FCO will confirm these as soon as they can.”
The FCO advised Britons in Hubei to ring one of two dedicated 24-hour telephone numbers before 11am on Wednesday to register their desire to be evacuated.
The family are determined to campaign to get the decision overturned so that Sindy will be allowed to leave. In the meantime, they do not know when they will be reunited again.


Topics



Coronavirus outbreak






China




Asia Pacific




Infectious diseases




news






Share on Facebook






Share on Twitter






Share via Email






Share on LinkedIn






Share on Pinterest






Share on WhatsApp






Share on Messenger








Reuse this content




 