Coronavirus national emergency: what does Trump's declaration do?

Donald Trump has declared a national emergency over the coronavirus pandemic. Emergency declarations allow the government to disburse funds, deploy the national guard, repurpose medical facilities and otherwise expedite and mobilize action in response to a specific threat.
“It gives tremendous powers for things that we need,” Trump said in a White House Rose Garden press conference on Friday. “Tremendous power actually.”
What kind of imminent relief might the declaration indicate?
Trump and members of his coronavirus response team made numerous assertions on Friday about help being on the way for the average American. But public confidence in the White House was low.
The health secretary said on Monday that 4m tests per week would be available by Friday. Instead, stories proliferated of patients in need of a test who could not access one.



Donald Trump declares national emergency over coronavirus pandemic







Read more





Through 12 March, the federal Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC) had completed 4,000 tests – not 4m. On Friday, Trump said the private sector would only produce 5m tests in the next month, adding: “I doubt we’ll need it.”
Testing for coronavirus, including drive-through testing, has been established in many states. Private labs have been working to accelerate test production and many Americans are likely to find tests increasingly available.
Asked if he took responsibility for a lack of testing so far, which might have produced a dangerous misunderstanding about the number of current US cases, Trump said: “No, I don’t take responsibility at all.”
Here is some of what the administration promised on Friday.
Drive-through testing
Trump was joined at his press conference by executives from Walmart, CVS and Target, who committed to devoting parking lot acreage to potential testing sites.
“Very soon Americans will be able to go to these drive-in sites and be able to join and participate in those tests,” said Vice-President Mike Pence.
Ventilators ‘ordered’
The coronavirus crisis in Italy and elsewhere has culminated in a shortage of breathing assistance devices in medical facilities. Asked about such a potential crunch in the US, Trump said: “We have ordered a large number of respirators just in case. We hope we don’t need them but we have ordered a large number.”
Private labs to process tests
Pence said the large private labs LabCorps and Quest had committed to processing tests gathered at mobile sites nationally. The participation of the private labs had been seen as a key to closing the testing gap.
“Americans will be able to visit one of the sites closest to them if the test indicates it … and one of the incredible companies there will be able to process the tests,” Pence said.
Stockpiles for healthcare facilities
The emergency declaration will help the government create and distribute needed stockpiles through a network that includes the Veterans Administration, the Department of Defense, the national guard and private hospitals, Dr Birx said, also allowing the government to “keep those hospital beds open for those who might need it”.
‘Eight, nine, whatever weeks’
Asked how long the government expects it will take before coronavirus cases peak in the US, Dr Tony Fauci of the National Institutes of Health said “eight, nine, whatever weeks, but I can’t give you a number because it depends on how successful we are”.
Birx said the government was taking steps to get through “that peak of the curve we’re all planning for”.
Update: A previous first entry in this story, announcing, as the president did, “a Google site to find where to get tested”, has been deleted. Despite Trump’s announcement of such a service, that service does not appear, with a subsequent statement by the Google-adjacent company in question, to be real.
The company Verily, which shares a corporate umbrella with Google, released a statement after Trump’s press conference announcing that it was developing a Covid-19 triage test tool, but the tool “ is in the early stages of development”, and the company is “planning to roll testing out in the Bay Area”, not nationally:
“We are developing a tool to help triage individuals for Covid-19 testing. Verily is in the early stages of development, and planning to roll testing out in the Bay Area, with the hope of expanding more broadly over time. We appreciate the support of government officials and industry partners and thank the Google engineers who have volunteered to be part of this effort.”


Topics



Coronavirus outbreak






Donald Trump




Trump administration




news






Share on Facebook






Share on Twitter






Share via Email






Share on LinkedIn






Share on Pinterest






Share on WhatsApp






Share on Messenger








Reuse this content




 