Covid-19's deserted landscapes – then and now

Beirut’s seaside Corniche in Lebanon.
Beirut’s Corniche promenade in Lebanon. Photograph: Mohamed Azakir/Reuters
The Grand Mosque in Basra in Iraq
The Grand Mosque in Basra, Iraq. Photograph: Essam al-Sudani
The Gateway of India in Mumbai
The Gateway of India in Mumbai. Photographs: Danish Siddiqui/Francis Mascarenhas/Reuters
Images show the fluctuation of nitrogen dioxide emissions across Europe.
Images show the fluctuation of nitrogen dioxide emissions across Europe. New satellite data reveals the decline of air pollution, specifically nitrogen dioxide emissions, over Italy. The effect is particularly marked in the north of the country. Photograph: European Space Agency
Cairo University in Egypt.
Cairo University in Egypt. Photograph: Shokry Hussien/Reuters
The pillars of the Roman temple of Hercules at the citadel in Amman in Jordan
The pillars of the Roman temple of Hercules at the citadel in Amman in Jordan. Photograph: Muhammad Hamed/Reuters
A cafe in Sidon in Lebanon
A cafe in Sidon in Lebanon. Photograph: Ali Hashisho/Reuters
Najaf airport in Iraq
Najaf airport in Iraq. Photograph: Alaa al-Marjani/Reuters
Outside Omar El Mokhtar primary school in Cairo in Egypt
Outside Omar El Mokhtar primary school in Cairo, Egypt. Photographs: Rania Gomaa/Reuters
The Church of the Nativity in Bethlehem on the West Bank
The Church of the Nativity in Bethlehem on the West Bank. Photograph: Mussa Qawasma/Reuters
A pool table in a cafe in the holy city of Kerbala in Iraq.
A pool table in a cafe in the holy city of Kerbala in Iraq. Photograph: Abdullah Dhiaa al-Deen/Reuters
Souq Waqif in Doha in Qatar.
Souq Waqif in Doha in Qatar. Photograph: Ibraheem al-Omari/Reuters

Topics



Photography then and now






Infectious diseases




Medical research




Microbiology




news






Share on Facebook






Share on Twitter






Share via Email






Share on LinkedIn






Share on Pinterest






Share on WhatsApp






Share on Messenger








Reuse this content




 