UK theatre ticket sales drop 92% due to Covid-19

Advance ticket sales at theatres around the UK have plummeted 92% in the wake of the coronavirus outbreak, new data reveals.
An analysis of advance ticket purchases from 196 venues of varying size, in the commercial and subsidised sectors, revealed the dramatic decrease in sales on 17 March compared with the same day in 2019. Numbers of advance tickets and income dropped by 92%. Theatres began to cancel productions several days ago, with the majority announcing that they would close their doors after the government’s warning on Monday to avoid theatres.
The analysis comes from arts management consultants TRG Arts and data specialists Purple Seven. TRG’s chief executive officer Jill Robinson said: “On the day after the government-imposed shutdown, leaders of theatres and concert halls were focusing on managing a phenomenal onslaught of requests for refunds. This in itself will have a huge impact on cashflow, and it will be multiplied if advance bookings dwindle.” Robinson said the government should ensure the sector has grants to deal with the immediate crisis and “at the same time, arts lovers need to show support for their local venues not only by making donations but also by purchasing advance tickets”.



It's curtains for theatre – but not, let us hope, for too long | Michael Billington







Read more





Many companies and venues have requested that ticket holders for cancelled productions consider foregoing a refund and donating the money to the theatre. Ticket revenue is a significant source of income for theatres, many of which rely on bars and restaurants which have also closed due to the coronavirus outbreak.
Many theatres have also launched fundraising campaigns. The Barn theatre in Cirencester, which celebrates its second birthday this week, is an unsubsidised charity that operates without funding from local authorities or Arts Council England. The loss of ticket revenue is “a hammer blow to us” it said. “It is estimated that we will lose upwards of £250,000 over the coming months, which could ultimately close the theatre on a permanent basis.” Hope Mill theatre in Manchester has been running for four years. “Through the ups and downs of operating a small, independent venue we have faced many challenges but none so unsettling and dangerous as this,” it said. “Now more than ever we ask you to continue to support, not only our venue, but our beloved arts community as we move in to unknown territory.”


Topics



Theatre






Coronavirus outbreak




West End




Manchester




London




Arts funding




news






Share on Facebook






Share on Twitter






Share via Email






Share on LinkedIn






Share on Pinterest






Share on WhatsApp






Share on Messenger








Reuse this content




 