Daily Mail fuels coronavirus lockdown panic as ABC presenters star live from their living rooms | Weekly Beast

There was a persistent rumour that the government would announce a lockdown after its Tuesday night meeting of the national cabinet. The “total shutdown” rumour was so widespread across social media that the health minister, Greg Hunt, took to Twitter to dispel it.
But that didn’t stop Daily Mail Australia publishing an alarming story on Wednesday morning claiming Australians were about to be forced into an Italian-style lockdown, with the headline “Confined to our homes, schools closed and small businesses in ruin”.
“Prime minister Scott Morrison is set to introduce a ‘European-style’ nationwide lockdown to minimise the threat of Covid-19 as the deadly virus continues to spread,” the Daily Mail reported on Wednesday. “Mr Morrison met with the national cabinet of health officers and state leaders on Tuesday, and is expected to announce the new measures on Wednesday.
“Italy, Spain and France have introduced policies forcing citizens to stay indoors to control the respiratory infection as cases soar past 187,000 globally.”

Greg Hunt 
(@GregHuntMP)
There is misinformation that the government is about to announce a major lockdown. This is false. Please get your factual updates from https://t.co/OF5vMUOB3M

March 17, 2020

Morrison did not announce a lockdown later that day – but the story is still live on the Daily Mail’s popular website and has been shared 1,100 times. No wonder people are scared and are panic buying when they can’t rely on the media to give them accurate information.
We’d like to think it wasn’t deliberate but we did get a laugh from the placement of two stories on the New Zealand news site NewsHub which made it look like the prime minister, Jacinda Ardern, was sitting on the toilet.

Sam Jarman <U+0001F468><U+0001F3FC><U+200D><U+0001F4BB> 
(@samjarman)
Unfortunate placement <U+0001F605> pic.twitter.com/wxLeFZy4ET

March 18, 2020




Guardian Australia’s morning mail: sign up for the essential news roundup







Read more





Casting the first stone
Shock jock Ray Hadley added a racial element to the rumour mill this week, during an interview with minister Peter Dutton. Discussing the allegations that shoppers were descending on regional towns and clearing out the supermarkets, Hadley claimed the profiteers were Asian Australians.
“It’s a busload of Asian Australians, I presume with a trailer on the back, just going to these shopping centres and shops ... Aldi, Coles and Woollies and clearing the joint out,” Hadley said on his top-rating 2GB program.
Hadley’s stablemate at Nine Radio, Alan Jones, was also spreading misinformation, albeit from an isolation studio where the 78-year-old has been sent to keep him safe from the coronavirus. Safe in his sterile environment, the threat of Covid-19 is overstated, like the climate emergency.
“In this modern world, at the slightest provocation it seems, we revert – despite all the money spent on education – we revert to hysteria and alarmism,” Jones said. “We now seem to be facing the health version of global warming. Exaggeration in almost everything. Certainly in description, and certainly in behaviour.”
Hadley and Jones’ unhelpful comments followed a bizarre claim by Daily Telegraph political editor Sharri Markson that the government had been told the coronavirus was deliberately manufactured by China.

Sharri Markson 
(@SharriMarkson)
What I have written is 100% accurate. Some advice to government suggests that’s where it originated. I have confirmed this.

March 13, 2020

“The buckling of countries that have been bustling for thousands of years, brought to their knees by a virus that some advice to government suggests may have been developed in a Wuhan biological ­warfare laboratory,” Markson wrote.
When the political editor was challenged about it, she doubled down, saying it was “100% accurate” to say it was advice to government.
In an interview with Alan Jones on Friday morning, Scott Morrison denied any such advice has been received, and the Guardian has also separately confirmed no such advice has been received.
According to the Scientist, the rumour has no basis: “Scientists say that while there’s not enough information to pinpoint where the virus came from, there is no evidence that it was created in a lab.”
More job losses
The announcement on Wednesday that 20 staff from Fox Sports, including nine journalists who are on the payroll of Sky News, had been made redundant was a cruel blow to the media industry at a time of widespread fear and uncertainty.
Fox Sport chief Peter Campbell said the decision had nothing to do with the coronavirus’ impact on sport.
“It simply reflects viewers are consuming sports news in different ways and at different times, together with the same challenging conditions in the advertising market that are impacting the entire entertainment industry,” Campbell said. “It is too soon to determine what the long-term effects of the pandemic may be on the industry as a whole and our business.”
The Fox Sports cull came on top of the news earlier this month that 600 jobs would be lost in June when AAP closes after 85 years. There was some welcome news on Thursday on the AAP closure, although it’s too early to pop the champagne. Reporters who were scheduled to leave next week were asked to delay their departure because there may be a last-minute reprieve.



AAP pauses plans for closure after 11th-hour bids to buy news wire service







Read more





Chief executive Bruce Davidson dropped the bombshell that several expressions of interest had been made to buy the entire AAP operation, including the Newswire, Pagemasters and Medianet.
Editor-in-chief Tony Gillies told the Weekly Beast he’d spent the day calling reporters whose finish date was next Friday and giving them the option of “pausing” their redundancy.
News Corp also unleashed another round of redundancies on its metro newspapers, including four at the Herald Sun. Not all of the redundancies were voluntary, with some staff tapped on the shoulder.
The advertising downturn has been blamed for the job losses at both Fox Sports and News Corp newspapers.
Hitting pause
But there was good news at the ABC, where management decided it was far too cruel to let people go in the middle of a pandemic. Managing director David Anderson told staff the axe that had been hovering over their heads was now not going to fall until the country is stable again.
“As you are aware, the leadership team and I had intended to announce the ABC’s new five-year plan by the end of this month, along with our response to the government’s indexation pause,” Anderson wrote in one of his daily coronavirus updates.
“I think you will agree with me when I say that the current situation with Covid-19 means our focus must be on the welfare of all of you and our role as a public broadcaster in providing the community with timely and credible information in this challenging time for our country.
“These are challenging circumstances and we have a crucial role in bringing all Australians the right information, context and advice.”
Anderson said the ABC’s role in a crisis was crucial. The audience also relied on Aunty for education and entertainment. “During an all-consuming crisis like this one, when anxiety levels are high, the programs on our television, radio and digital platforms provide a different kind of service, one that offers people support through the quality and variety of our work.”

Official Bluey TV 
(@OfficialBlueyTV)
Thank you for all your lovely messages and comments on the new Blueys today. Especially those stuck at home. We hope this helps keep things clean. Hope you're all doing okay out there <U+0001F499><U+0001F9FC> pic.twitter.com/I6QOgiXKyz

March 18, 2020

But there was something the audience responded to that made the week really special, and that was a new episode of the hit show Bluey, which had a record number of 458,000 people watching the first episode at 8am on ABC Kids. That is almost three times the audience of the competing Today show on Nine. Bluey was also smart enough to produce a special poster to teach kids how to wash their hands.
Live from the living room
Most media companies are now encouraging staff to work from home, with 35% of ABC staff working remotely already. Some of those working from home are TV presenters, which is pretty extraordinary.
News Breakfast hosts Lisa Millar and Michael Rowland are in the studio in Melbourne together – sitting together on the couch but a metre-and-a-half apart. They are not interviewing any guests live in the studio, instead chatting to people via Skype. Weather guy Nate Byrne is in the studio but at a safe distance.
Sports presenter and back-up host Paul Kennedy is doing his sports reports from his study, complete with a changing display of pictures of his kids and his own childhood art behind him, sparking the audience’s interest each day.
Insiders has decided to play it safe and not fly commentators to Melbourne on Sunday to sit on the couch with David Speers. News Corp’s Niki Savva and Guardian Australia’s Katharine Murphy will appear remotely from Canberra.

Samuel Clark 
(@sclark_melbs)
Due to the COVID-19 pandemic, @InsidersABC has decided not to fly our interstate panelists to Melbourne for the foreseeable future. Niki Savva and @murpharoo will join us remotely from Canberra. Now was your hands good people https://t.co/REj2bbrpFD

March 19, 2020

The leading breakfast show Sunrise is also practising social distancing, with many staff working from home and interviews conducted remotely. But the good news for the industry is people are so hungry for information, audiences are up across the board, including sales of hard-copy newspapers for the first time in years.


Topics



Australian media




The weekly beast






Scott Morrison




Coronavirus outbreak




Australian Broadcasting Corporation




Daily Mail




News Corporation




Media business




comment






Share on Facebook






Share on Twitter






Share via Email






Share on LinkedIn






Share on Pinterest






Share on WhatsApp






Share on Messenger








Reuse this content




 