Zara Phillips will not self-isolate after Italy trip

The Queen’s granddaughter Zara Phillips and her husband, former England rugby player Mike Tindall, will not be self-isolating after returning from a skiing trip in northern Italy, where a coronavirus outbreak has been spreading.Phillips and Tindall have come back from a trip to Bormio, a town in the Lombardy region of the Alps in northern Italy.
The couple’s management said the pair were following government guidelines and medical advice, and as they currently did not have any symptoms of the infection they would not be going into self-isolation.
Graphic
Earlier this week a school in Nantwich, Cheshire, closed over fears that pupils who had been on a ski trip to the same resort, were displaying flu-like symptoms.
The British government updated its guidance on Tuesday morning, with the health secretary, Matt Hancock, saying that those returning from anywhere north of Pisa, Florence and Rimini would need to stay indoors if they had symptoms, however mild.
New guidance also said those returning from any quarantined towns would have to immediately go into self-isolation even if they had developed no symptoms of the virus. The couple’s management confirmed that they did not visit any of the quarantined towns.
Q&A How can I protect myself and others from the coronavirus outbreak?  
 Show 
 Hide  
The World Health Organization is recommending that people take simple precautions to reduce exposure to and transmission of the coronavirus, for which there is no specific cure or vaccine.
The UN agency advises people to:
Frequently wash their hands with an alcohol-based hand rub or warm water and soap
Cover their mouth and nose with a flexed elbow or tissue when sneezing or coughing
Avoid close contact with anyone who has a fever or cough
Seek early medical help if they have a fever, cough and difficulty breathing, and share their travel history with healthcare providers
Many countries are now enforcing or recommending curfews or lockdowns. 
In the UK, NHS advice is that anyone with symptoms should stay at home for at least 7 days.
If you live with other people, they should stay at home for at least 14 days, to avoid spreading the infection outside the home.



Was this helpful?







Thank you for your feedback.

The Italian authorities implemented measures on 22 February, and the latest reported coronavirus death toll there had risen to 12, with the number of confirmed cases at 374.
Eleven towns have been in lockdown and sporting events have been played to empty stadiums. The Venice Carnival was also cancelled early due to concerns about the infection spreading.

Despite telling Britons returning from northern Italy to self-isolate if they develop coronavirus symptoms, the FCO has not advised against travel to the country.
On Wednesday, Hancock said there had been 13 cases of the virus in the UK. Eight of those people had been discharged, he added, noting that the government expected more cases to arise.
He said the government would be rolling out a publicity campaign soon and coordinating with its international partners to ensure it is ready for all eventualities.
• This article was amended on 27 February 2020 to clarify some details about the trip made by Zara Phillips and Mike Tindall to Italy.


Topics



Zara Phillips






Mike Tindall




Coronavirus outbreak




news






Share on Facebook






Share on Twitter






Share via Email






Share on LinkedIn






Share on Pinterest






Share on WhatsApp






Share on Messenger








Reuse this content




 