Stonehenge equinox: 'Let's hope by solstice we're in a better place'

Hilary and Wesley have been coming to Stonehenge to mark solstices and equinoxes for more than three decades. When the site was closed off for years after the Battle of the Beanfield in 1985 they would leap the razor-wire-topped fences to gain access to the sacred site.
The pair, aged 58 and 53 respectively, were some of the hardy band that arrived before dawn on Friday to witness the spring equinox sunrise on the Wiltshire plains, despite English Heritage suspending its policy of allowing controlled access on special days.
Hilary and Wesley, who are from Dorset, gazed at the fences and considered clambering – but decided against.
“It’s really odd to be standing next to a fence and not jump over it,” said Hilary. “We thought we might do it just for old times’ sake. But we understand the reasons why and we think it’s right that we respect the decision.”
Quick guide What to do if you have coronavirus symptoms in the UK  
 Show 
 Hide  

Symptoms are defined as either:
a high temperature - you feel hot to touch on your chest or back
a new continuous cough - this means you've started coughing repeatedly
NHS advice is that anyone with symptoms should stay at home for at least 7 days.
If you live with other people, they should stay at home for at least 14 days, to avoid spreading the infection outside the home.
After 14 days, anyone you live with who does not have symptoms can return to their normal routine. But, if anyone in your home gets symptoms, they should stay at home for 7 days from the day their symptoms start. Even if it means they're at home for longer than 14 days.
Information: If you live with someone who is 70 or over, has a long-term condition, is pregnant or has a weakened immune system, try to find somewhere else for them to stay for 14 days.
If you have to stay at home together, try to keep away from each other as much as possible.
After 7 days, if you no longer have a high temperature you can return to your normal routine.
If you still have a high temperature, stay at home until your temperature returns to normal.
If you still have a cough after 7 days, but your temperature is normal, you do not need to continue staying at home. A cough can last for several weeks after the infection has gone.
Source: NHS England on 18 March 2020




Was this helpful?







Thank you for your feedback.

Hilary said she found it difficult to explain what drew her to the stones. “I’m not a pagan or a Christian or anything else. We live in a town and I’ve always used this place as a touchpoint with nature. When you live in a concrete jungle, you’re divorced from the seasons and nature. I like to ground myself here four times a year. It’s my only spirituality.”
English Heritage expressed regret that the circle was closed because of the coronavirus crisis. It said: “Our first priority is the health and wellbeing of all visitors, volunteers and staff, and we hope you can understand why we have taken this unprecedented step.”
The charity said it would continue to plan for the summer solstice in the hope it will still take place.


 
 

 
 Facebook 
 
 Twitter 
 
 Pinterest 


 Visitors are seen near Stonehenge on Friday. Photograph: Finnbarr Webster/Getty Images
Many regulars heeded English Heritage’s request to stay away. King Arthur, a druid and familiar figure at the site, kept a low profile so as not to encourage members of his Loyal Arthurian Warband to attend in numbers.
“It would be inappropriate of me to encourage others to go,” he said. “I cannot be seen to be there in case it is seen as encouraging others to gather.”
He suggested that people find a quieter place to mark the equinox. “Not at Stonehenge, our temple, but perhaps in a wooded glade or solitary place on upland or plain. Or alone in the stillness of a quiet space.”
Even so, vans and cars parked up in the rough lane close to the stones on Thursday night. Campfires were lit and cider was drunk. The sunrise itself was obscured by a line of low cloud but shortly afterwards it climbed high enough to light up the stones and the plains. People hugged and smiled, skylarks sang.
Stuart Hannington, a druid, also stayed behind the fence, accepting it was fair to restrict access. “They’re closing the churches so it seems OK that they are not allowing us to get to the stones. It’s disappointing but we have to make sacrifices.”

steven morris 
(@stevenmorris20)
A druid at Stonehenge for the spring equinox. pic.twitter.com/tTHSFxtv3N

March 20, 2020

Hannington, known as the Wizard of Tottenham, and his dog, called Dog, have been camping on the plains since the last full moon and will stay for the next new one.
This is his second equinox celebration in the last few days. His friend, Merlin, uses a different way of calculating the equinox and it fell a few days ago. “I do both just to make sure,” said Hannington.
It was the first time Duncan Eadie, from Cornwall, had visited. “It’s an amazing spot, something that is going to outlast us. We worry about the day-to-day stuff but this stone circle is here for good.”

Martin, from Hampshire, is a member of the Shakti Sings Choir that normally performs at the stones when access is allowed. He was the only choir member there on Friday, and opted not to sing a solo.
“As society collapses, this feels like a sacred place to be,” he said. “It’s bringing us back to the simplicity of the sun and stones. Let’s hope by the summer solstice we’re all in a better place.”


Topics



Stonehenge






Coronavirus outbreak




Heritage




news






Share on Facebook






Share on Twitter






Share via Email






Share on LinkedIn






Share on Pinterest






Share on WhatsApp






Share on Messenger








Reuse this content




 