Suspend all mortgage and rent payments for NHS workers. Now | Patrick Collinson

A letter to chancellor Rishi Sunak following my conversation with an A&E nurse who is working with suspected Covid-19 patients, without even a proper face mask
Julia, not her real name, is a close friend, a nurse in her 50s at a hospital in Kent. This is distressing, but it’s what she told me on Thursday morning.
“I have just completed four 12-hour shifts over five days. There are no hazmat suits for this ward, though we have six Covid-19 contacts in isolation. I have a pair of gloves, a paper face mask with a plastic shield and a plastic apron. It’s a fucking joke.
“The policy keeps changing. Now they are telling us we don’t need a hazmat suit for looking after Covid-19, just the apron, mask and gloves. I’m working with a healthcare assistant who is 71 and a nurse who is 72. They should be at home, but they just say ‘who is going to do it otherwise?’.
“I was running six patients on the ward who were supposed to be in the Covid-19 pod. We do have a pod, and some do go into isolation, but some don’t. It’s completely ad hoc. The swabs are taking three to five days to come back from Southampton, where we send them. Luckily, my Covid-19 suspects came back negative. We nurses are not being tested.
“Both isolation rooms on our ward were blocked for a deep clean yesterday. So the people coming in with suspected Covid-19 are put in the same cohort as other suspects. The problem is, if you haven’t got it, the risk is you will get it from being in the same cohort with someone who does test positive. There are only 12 ventilators in our hospital.
“The deep-clean taskforce are heroes. They are on the lowest pay band in the NHS – band one or two, if they’re lucky. The demand on them has gone up massively. I haven’t had time to get to the shops. When I did get there, there was nothing. Thanks a lot, world, for looking after the people who look after you.
“My partner is self-employed and had to shut up shop earlier in the week. Our income has halved. This morning I rang Lloyds Bank to put our mortgage on hold. It said there was an hour wait to get through. After an hour and a half I still couldn’t get to speak to anyone. I drove to a local branch. But they said I just had to ring that number again. They wouldn’t even add a note to my account. I’m just going to stop the direct debit for the mortgage and see what happens.
“I’m really hacked off that the chancellor has announced £330bn to support business, without even mentioning healthcare workers. Obviously, we need more hazmats and more ventilators, but you need trained nurses to work them, too. If I die from this, I want compensation for my family. I have two children. I want to see my partner and them looked after.”
Julia deserves more than this. I hate the constant wartime analogies, but this is an emergency like no other we’ve seen in our lifetimes. Normally, I write about personal finance for the average reader – and, of course, there are lots of sensible things I could advise you to do (there is a good list here). But the health service is our defence, and it’s their health, resources and personal finances we should be utterly focused on.
Britain has run an economy based around financial services that gifts the people at the top huge rewards for work that is, for the most part, socially useless. Our most socially useful workers are being treated appallingly.
What should we be doing? As chancellor, Rishi Sunak, you should order the immediate suspension of all rent and mortgage payments for NHS workers, with no interest or accruals added later. You should direct what’s left of our manufacturing industry into urgent production of goods for the NHS. You should temporarily double the pay of all NHS workers, and set out how the government will treat the wounded and veterans of this battle. There’s no time to lose. Do it now.
p.collinson@theguardian.com


Topics



Money




Money talks






NHS




Health




Coronavirus outbreak




Budget 2020




comment






Share on Facebook






Share on Twitter






Share via Email






Share on LinkedIn






Share on Pinterest






Share on WhatsApp






Share on Messenger








Reuse this content




 