Flybe: airline collapses two months after government announces rescue

Flybe, Europe’s largest regional airline, has collapsed into administration with the loss of more than 2,000 jobs, less than two months after the government announced a rescue deal.
The impact of the coronavirus on flight bookings proved the last straw for the Exeter-based airline, which operates almost 40% of UK domestic flights, as the government stalled on a controversial £100m loan.



Flybe falls prey to coronavirus and 'stronger' airlines are likely to follow







Read more





The UK Civil Aviation Authority (CAA) announced early on Thursday morning that the airline had entered administration.
It said all flights were cancelled and urged passengers not to go to airports.

UK Civil Aviation Authority 
(@UK_CAA)
Flybe has entered administration.All Flybe flights are cancelled. Please do not go to the airport as your Flybe flight will not be operating.For flights operated by franchise partners, passengers should make contact with their airline.#Flybe pic.twitter.com/O9vQ7mvnR8

March 5, 2020

In a statement, the chief executive, Mark Anderson, said the company had made “every possible attempt” to avoid collapse but had been “unable to overcome significant funding challenges”.
Anderson said: “The UK has lost one of its greatest regional assets. Flybe has been a key part of the UK aviation industry for four decades, connecting regional communities, people and businesses across the entire nation.”
Flybe’s administrator, the accountancy firm EY, referred to coronavirus in its statement as it flagged “added pressures” on the travel industry in the last few weeks that made its precarious financial situation worse. Before the viral outbreak, Flybe was already struggling with rising fuel costs – a key factor in any airline’s ability to make a profit – soft demand and competition.
The transport secretary, Grant Shapps, tweeted it was “very sad” Flybe had gone out of business after serving passengers for four decades. He said the government was “urgently working” with the airline industry to “identify how key routes can be re-established by other airlines as soon as possible”.
Flybe passengers and staff are being offered free travel by all First Rail train operators, which consist of Great Western Railway, South Western Railway, TransPennine Express and Avanti West Coast. EasyJet has offered rescue fares for passengers and free flights to Flybe staff to get home. 
flybe airports
Flybe’s bankruptcy has come only a week before a budget that it hoped would help bolster its precarious finances, after the previous chancellor said he would look again at levels of air passenger duty (APD) .
However, the airline’s owners Connect Airways – a consortium of Virgin Atlantic, Stobart Air and the hedge fund Cyrus Capital – have pulled the plug, a little over a year after buying it.
The airline employed more than 2,000 people directly and was one of the leading carriers at airports including Belfast, Southampton, Manchester and Birmingham. About 8 million people a year used its services. Unions have warned that other jobs would be put at risk by Flybe’s collapse and transport links lost on dozens of domestic routes where it is the sole operator.
Flybe has long struggled to balance the books, despite cost-cutting plans and redundancies, and was reporting losses of about £20m a year before the Connect takeover.
With the new government having promised to “level up” the economy, it was anxious to demonstrate it was helping the ailing airline and ministers announced the Flybe rescue in January. However, the measures – which included some deferral of tax, a potential loan and promises to review regional air connectivity and APD levels – have not proved enough.
Public anxiety and curbs on business travel because of the coronavirus outbreak have forced airlines around the world to retrench in the face of falling bookings and Flybe was also suffering from the drop in demand.
Quick guide What are your rights when flights are cancelled or delayed?  
 Show 
 Hide  

When an airline starts cancelling or delaying flights for more than three hours, passengers are entitled to compensation of €250-€600 (£230-£550) under European Union (EU) rules.
These rules apply if your flight left from the UK, the EU, Iceland, Norway or Switzerland, or  was with a European airline and landed in the UK, the EU, Norway or Switzerland, no matter where you were flying from.
The cause of the problem has to be under the airline’s control and not an ‘extraordinary circumstance’. Lack of planes/staff, flight overbooking, a strike by airline staff or an IT failure are all considered to be within the airline’s control – so compensation is payable.
Passengers on cancelled short-haul flights – up to 1,500km – are entitled to €250 or £230. For flights of 1,500km-3,500km, passengers are entitled to €400, and €600 for the longest flights (more than 3,500km).
Compensation is also payable if the plane is delayed. The payments are the same but only kick in when the plane has been delayed three hours for short flights or four hours for the longer trips. The delay is calculated against the time the plane was due to arrive.
Passengers are also entitled to ‘assistance’ under the EU rules. Short-haul passengers should receive food and water after two hours. Mid-distance passengers get help after three hours, while long-haul passengers receive it after they have been held in the terminal for four hours. If the delay is overnight, passengers should be provided with hotel accommodation but this often does not happen. This assistance should be provided irrespective of whether the delay is the airline’s fault.
The airlines have fought these compensation rules since they were introduced and passengers have had to go to court to get their money. The airlines frequently blame delays on events outside their control. Freak weather events or a last-minute strike by air traffic controllers are deemed to be outside their control. A lack of planes or staff is not.
What will happen to the scheme for UK travellers after Brexit is not yet clear. Miles Brignall




Was this helpful?







Thank you for your feedback.

The government has been unwilling to bail out Flybe, despite calls from unions and MPs in the regions, with other airlines, led by the British Airways owner, IAG, and Ryanair, objecting about the prospect of state aid and threatening legal action.
It is the second major British airline to go bankrupt in six months after the collapse of Thomas Cook last September.
Unite’s national officer for aviation, Oliver Richardson, said it was “outrageous” that the government had not learned the lessons of last year’s collapse of Thomas Cook or of Monarch in 2017 . He said Flybe staff would be feeling “angry and confused”.
He said: “The UK economy is highly dependent on a viable and supported regional airline and airport network. For central government not to support and nurture this, especially as we deal with the twin uncertainties of the Covid-19 virus and the changes that will come with Brexit, is unhelpful and irresponsible.”
Andy McDonald, the shadow transport secretary, said the loss of Flybe would cause “real anxiety” throughout the country.
The British Airline Pilots’ Association hit out at the government and Connect for the collapse. The trade union’s general secretary, Brian Strutton, said: “Six weeks ago, when the ownership consortium lost confidence, the government promised a rescue package, apparently at that time recognising the value of Flybe to the regional economy of the UK.
“Throughout, pilots, cabin crew and ground staff have done their jobs brilliantly, while behind the scenes the owners and, sadly, government connived to walk away. Flybe staff will feel disgusted at this betrayal and these broken promises.”


Sign up to the daily Business Today email or follow Guardian Business on Twitter at @BusinessDesk
A government spokesman said the closure of Flybe was a commercial decision by the company.
He added: “We will bring forward recommendations to help ensure that the whole of the UK has the connections in place that people rely on.
“Flybe’s financial difficulties were longstanding and well-documented and pre-date the outbreak of Covid-19. We are well prepared for a potential outbreak and this week we have set out an action plan with details of our response.”
The CAA will not be operating a repatriation programme for any stranded customers in Europe and said passengers should make their own alternative travel arrangements via other airlines, rail or coach operators.


Topics



Flybe






Airline industry




Air transport




Coronavirus outbreak




Transport




Europe




news






Share on Facebook






Share on Twitter






Share via Email






Share on LinkedIn






Share on Pinterest






Share on WhatsApp






Share on Messenger








Reuse this content




 