10,000 extra troops to join British army's Covid support force

The Ministry of Defence is to double the size of the military’s civil contingency unit to create a 20,000-strong Covid support force, the defence secretary has announced.
An additional 10,000 troops will be added to the 10,000 routinely held at higher readiness in case of a civil emergency, and reservists could also be called up, Ben Wallace said on Wednesday.
There are fears about the ability of the police and NHS, which are both already at full stretch, to deal with the scale of the crisis. While the government has been reluctant to highlight such a bleak prospect, the armed forces need to be prepared for the threat of a breakdown in civil order given that troops have been deployed in other countries to enforce lockdowns and prevent looting of shops.

Announcing the boost in numbers, the MoD sought to focus on the assistance troops could provide in the areas of health and science.
It said the Covid support force could be asked to help with tasks including the driving of NHS oxygen tankers, for which 150 military personnel will begin training on Monday. Additionally, scientists from the Defence Science and Technology Laboratory (DSTL) are assisting Public Health England’s effort to understand the virus and tackle the spread.
Wallace said: “The men and women of our armed forces stand ready to protect Britain and her citizens from all threats, including Covid-19. The unique flexibility and dedication of the services means that we are able to provide assistance across the whole of society in this time of need.
“From me downwards the entirety of the Ministry of Defence and the armed forces are dedicated to getting the nation through this global pandemic.”



Coronavirus UK cases: how many are in your area?







Read more





Like the emergency services the army has been suffering from shortages in personnel.
Wallace said measures had been taken to enable the callup of reservists. Capacity has been freed up by the cancellation of training exercises overseas, including in Kenya and Canada, some at the request of host governments, to aid their attempts to prevent the spread of Covid-19. British troops on overseas operations have also had rest and recuperation cancelled.
Maj Gen Charlie Stickland, the assistant chief of the defence staff (operations and commitments), said: “Putting more personnel at a higher state of readiness and having our reserves on standby gives us greater flexibility to support public services as and when they require our assistance.
“The Covid support force, potentially drawing upon our highly skilled scientists at DSTL or oxygen tanker drivers, will form part of a whole force effort to support the country during its time of need. Our servicemen and women are committed to maintain our operational output and delivering any support the government requires.”
Q&A How can I protect myself and others from the coronavirus outbreak?  
 Show 
 Hide  
The World Health Organization is recommending that people take simple precautions to reduce exposure to and transmission of the coronavirus, for which there is no specific cure or vaccine.
The UN agency advises people to:
Frequently wash their hands with an alcohol-based hand rub or warm water and soap
Cover their mouth and nose with a flexed elbow or tissue when sneezing or coughing
Avoid close contact with anyone who has a fever or cough
Seek early medical help if they have a fever, cough and difficulty breathing, and share their travel history with healthcare providers
Many countries are now enforcing or recommending curfews or lockdowns. 
In the UK, NHS advice is that anyone with symptoms should stay at home for at least 7 days.
If you live with other people, they should stay at home for at least 14 days, to avoid spreading the infection outside the home.



Was this helpful?







Thank you for your feedback.

The military has already assisted during the Covid-19 outbreak with repatriation flights from China and Japan.
It is currently bringing home hundreds of British citizens from Cuba. They were aboard the British-operated MS Braemar cruise ship which docked in Cuba early on Wednesday after days of searching for a port in the Caribbean that would allow it to dock.
Specialist military planners are also being deployed to steer local responses to the pandemic and tackle rising pressure on care homes, after a request by the communities secretary, Robert Jenrick.

Up to 70 non-uniformed military personnel with crisis planning expertise are being sent to all 38 local resilience forums, to “test planning and identify weaknesses”, defence sources said.
Local resilience forums are normally made up of councils, NHS bodies, emergency services and the environment agency. The military planners joining them are described as experts in coordinating resources in a crisis, which in the care system will mean bolstering already stretched operations.
Jenrick asked for an increase in military help, specifically highlighting the need to “support local authority elements of Covid-19 response plans, including social care”.
The Standing Joint Command HQ in Aldershot, Hampshire, will serve as the command and control structure for the Covid support force.
The military was recently involved in civil contingency work when called on to support the government’s response to flooding.



Topics



Military






Coronavirus outbreak




Ben Wallace




news






Share on Facebook






Share on Twitter






Share via Email






Share on LinkedIn






Share on Pinterest






Share on WhatsApp






Share on Messenger








Reuse this content




 