Coronavirus: second Australian flight from Wuhan to take evacuees to disused village near Darwin

A second Qantas coronavirus evacuation flight is scheduled to fly overnight on Friday to rescue more Australians from virus-hit Wuhan and take them to a quarantine site outside Darwin.
On Friday the flight was still awaiting final approval from Chinese authorities to take people out of the locked down city in China’s central Hubei province, but preparations were being made for Australians to leave for the new quarantine centre rather than Christmas Island, where the first Qantas evacuees were taken.
Scott Morrison confirmed on Friday that a vacated former construction workers’ village outside Darwin will be used as quarantine site for the evacuees.
Australian citizens and permanent residents in Wuhan who have been approved for the flight have been told they must make their own way to the airport. Check-in for the flight was due to open just after 6pm Wuhan time on Friday. The flight was scheduled to leave just after midnight.



Coronavirus live updates: cruise ship cases rise to 61 as China mourns whistleblower doctor – latest news







Read more





In correspondence from the Department of Foreign Affairs and Trade, passengers have been told: “Please allow sufficient time to arrive at the airport noting there will be a number of checkpoints en route. We are aware that there may be long delays at the checkpoint.
“As a reminder you need to meet both Chinese and Australian government conditions, you will be subject to immigration checks by both governments.”
The flight is likely to be the last charter the Australian government is able to organise to leave Wuhan.
Speaking in Townsville, Morrison said: “We will be moving to the contingency plans for overflow that we have been working on … we will be using a mining camp facility in the Northern Territory near Darwin and we are working through the consultation phase with local community and others about the implications of those arrangements.”
When the Australian government’s initial charter flight, which left Wuhan Monday, was first announced, some Australians chose to stay in the city, preferring to wait for the outbreak to subside, but as it has spread and intensified, many are now taking the chance to leave.
Globally, the outbreak has infected more than 31,000 people and killed 636, the vast majority of those in Hubei province.
The first Qantas flight evacuated 243 Australian citizens and permanent residents to Christmas Island on Monday. Thirty-six Australians who left Wuhan on a NZ-government chartered flight on Wednesday were also eventually taken to Christmas Island. 
The second Australian flight appeared to be over-subscribed, the foreign affairs department said.
“The number of people wanting to secure their return to Australia is far more than there are seats available on the flight.”
Some Australians in Wuhan approved for the flight are already making plans for the unpredictable journey through police and military checkpoints to reach the airport. Identification checks are being carried out up to three kilometres from the airport.
On previous international evacuation flights, some passengers have not been able to reach the airport. Others have been refused boarding at final medical screenings.
“If someone in your family has a fever or other symptoms, we advise they consider their options before they leave home,” Dfat has advised. “If a fever is detected at a checkpoint it is possible they will be directed to a Chinese medical facility and not allowed to board the flight. The Chinese authorities consider 37.3 degrees temperature as the point you will require medical assistance.”
Passengers have been warned to expect long delays.
“There are limited facilities at the airport. Access to water, electricity and toilets will be available. Restaurants and shops are closed at check-in and inside the terminal.
“We recommend you bring some food provisions for you and your families at the airport to last you up to 10 hours. You will not be able to take food on the plane.”



'Hysterical and ruinous': Christmas Island furious over Australia's coronavirus plans







Read more





Nearly 280 Australians are currently being held in isolation inside the Christmas Island immigration detention centre.
The centre can house more than 1000 people, but because of the medical necessity to isolate coronavirus evacuees from each other, as well as the general community, to minimise the impact of any possible outbreak, the capacity of the centre is significantly reduced.
The government’s preference – advised by doctors managing the cohort on Christmas Island – was for a second quarantine facility elsewhere.


 
 

 
 Facebook 
 
 Twitter 
 
 Pinterest 


 Northern Territory chief minister Michael Gunner holds a press conference on the coronavirus evacuations. Photograph: ABC News
The Manigurr-ma village, 30km outside Darwin­, was built in 2012 by Japanese energy giant Inpex as accommodation for its workers. At the peak of construction work on Inpex’s $55b gas plant on Darwin Harbour it housed around 3,500 workers.
One student from the Good Shepherd Lutheran College, which shares a fence with the mining village, told Guardian Australia students were worried about being potentially so close to the infectious virus.
The village has a medical centre, industrial kitchen, dining hall, cinema, library, gym and swimming pool. It was handed over to the NT government, on a peppercorn rent, in 2019.
NT chief minister Michael Gunner confirmed he had had discussions with the federal government about using the facility as a quarantine site.
“Obviously we are happy to help to make sure Australians are looked after,” he said.
“Our priority in any of those conversations will be how do we make sure Territorians remain safe and healthy.”
Gunner said the federal government’s now-defunct Wickham Point immigration detention centre could also be repurposed to house evacuees.


Topics



Coronavirus outbreak






Christmas Island




Infectious diseases




China




Northern Territory




Darwin




Scott Morrison




news






Share on Facebook






Share on Twitter






Share via Email






Share on LinkedIn






Share on Pinterest






Share on WhatsApp






Share on Messenger








Reuse this content




 