Self-isolate at home, they say. But what if you are homeless? | Simon Hattenstone and Daniel Lavelle

While the government often seems to show callous indifference to Britain’s rough sleepers, on Tuesday it was announced that a pot of money would be provided to help our homeless people avoid coronavirus.
It is good the government has acted – but now for the bad news: rather than a policy or strategy, this feels little more than a contemptuous wad of cash chucked into the collective begging bowl of Britain’s most vulnerable people.
Meanwhile, there is a simple solution staring the government in the face – pass emergency legislation to commandeer some of Britain’s now near-empty hotels and house homeless people in them.
A grand total of £3.2m is to be distributed to Britain’s councils to do as they see fit with rough sleepers. To call it a pittance is insulting to pittances. Official government figures suggested there were 4,677 people sleeping rough in 2018 (the most recent figures). This is thought to be a huge underestimate. Last month it was revealed that council data showed almost 25,000 people slept rough in 2019. So if we go by official figures this would amount to £684 to take each rough sleeper off the streets and keep them safe. Take the more disturbing estimate of 25,000 homeless people and you’re down to £128 per head. Keeping homeless people safe is an expensive business, and this isn’t the best of times.
So despite the comforting words from the communities secretary, Robert Jenrick, that he is providing money for society’s most vulnerable to self-isolate, the reality is it looks as if the government is prepared to let thousands of rough sleepers die under bridges, in shop doors and outside train stations. Perhaps the only time the prime minister will truly address the problem is when it becomes a threat to his leadership – that is, when the public get physically and morally repulsed by walking over dead bodies. 



Perhaps the only time the prime minister will truly address the problem is when the public get physically and morally repulsed by walking over dead bodies

Most homeless people on the street have hugely compromised immune systems – a result of sleeping rough itself and, all too often, drug and alcohol addiction – and therefore are at a heightened risk of contracting coronavirus. In the most recent figures from the Office of National Statistics the mean average age of death for rough sleepers was 45 for males, 43 for females, and two in five deaths of homeless people was related to drug poisoning. The total estimated number of rough sleeper deaths was 726, a 22% year-on-year rise. It doesn’t bear thinking what these figures will look like for 2020 if the government doesn’t act now.
Last week the campaigning group Museum of Homelessness, alongside a coalition of homelessness organisations, called on the government to house our rough sleepers in hotels. But clearly the government’s £3.2m offer wouldn’t be anywhere near enough to do this – the Museum of Homelessness stated that the government’s £500m hardship fund for local authorities, and more if necessary, “should be used to block-book hotel rooms with a bathroom so people can isolate”.
It may sounds like a pipe dream, but it isn’t – and shouldn’t be. This solution makes sound economic sense for a prime minister desperate to keep the economy churning. Not only would it save lives if homeless people self-isolated in hotels, it would boost the economy and keep some people desperate for work in employment. What makes government intervention even more urgent is that the country’s winter night shelters are due to close in the first week of April. Hotel bedrooms would provide a relatively safe environment for medics to treat people with coronavirus, for addiction and mental health agencies to provide support, and for the public to drop off donations.
It won’t work perfectly for all homeless people (some may refuse to go indoors and some may refuse to isolate because of the need to feed addictions) but it would work for many.
Are there enough hotel bedrooms? You bet there are. In 2016 there were an estimated 874,300 bedrooms in hotels and similar accommodation in the UK. So to accommodate the larger council estimate of the UK’s rough sleepers would take up 2.9% of the nation’s hotel bedrooms (while the official estimate would account for 0.5% of the rooms).
Meanwhile the public is asking what it can do to help homeless people in the pandemic. The rules are pretty much the same as ever – be kind, chat to homeless people, ask if they want food/drink, give money if you fancy, act responsibly, and don’t take risks for their sake and yours (sitting on filthy pavements with people, which we might do in normal times, is obviously unhygienic.) Donate useful things to individuals and charities. Many charities are running low on toilet roll, long-life milk and hand-sanitiser. So if you have bought few extra bottles, cartons or rolls, salve your conscience by donating some to those in need.



Coronavirus has exposed the extent of the UK's social crisis | Owen Jones







Read more





But our individual acts are small fry. This is the time for big government with deep pockets and a moral compass. The first is not something normally associated with a Tory administration, the latter is something Boris Johnson has often been accused of lacking. Now the Conservative government can show it really does care about the struggling people it so assiduously, and successfully courted at the recent general election.
The prime minister can prove that “levelling up” is more than an empty mantra by saving the lives of those stuck at the very bottom. As mayor of London in 2009, Johnson promised to eradicate rough sleeping by 2012. Not only did he conspicuously fail to meet his target (the figure rose), he never seemed to mention it again.
Now he has another opportunity to eradicate homelessness – not just in London but in the whole country. And he can do so in two ways; one barbaric, the other honourable. Johnson could allow people to die one by one on our streets. Or he could prove that he believes the lives of homeless people really do matter, house them in our empty hotels, and help them start to recover their lives.
• Simon Hattenstone is a Guardian features writer. Daniel Lavelle writes on mental health, homelessness and social care


Topics



Coronavirus outbreak




Opinion






Homelessness




Poverty




Social exclusion




Social care




Housing




Boris Johnson




comment






Share on Facebook






Share on Twitter






Share via Email






Share on LinkedIn






Share on Pinterest






Share on WhatsApp






Share on Messenger








Reuse this content




 