Geneva motor show cancelled as Switzerland bans large events

The Geneva International Motor Show has been cancelled after the Swiss government banned large events of more than 1,000 people as a measure to help combat the spread of coronavirus.
The annual show is one of the world’s largest automotive events and attracted as many as 600,000 executives and car fans to the city last year. It was due to take place from 2-15 March, but all ticketholders will now be refunded.



British Airways owner and easyJet warn of coronavirus impact







Read more





The event’s director, Olivier Rihs, said the cancellation could cost the Geneva economy between €200m and €250m (£170m-£213m) because of lost spending. The organisers expected to lose about €2m, although carmakers’ fees to exhibit were non-refundable, he said.
“In view of the current situation and the spread of the coronavirus, the federal council has categorised the situation in Switzerland as ‘special’ in terms of the Epidemics Act,” the cabinet said in a statement on Friday.
“Large-scale events involving more than 1,000 people are to be banned. The ban comes into immediate effect and will apply at least until 15 March.”
The Basel carnival, which is listed by Unesco as an important part of intangible cultural heritage and due to run from 2 to 5 March, is also likely be cancelled.
Q&A How can I protect myself and others from the coronavirus outbreak?  
 Show 
 Hide  
The World Health Organization is recommending that people take simple precautions to reduce exposure to and transmission of the coronavirus, for which there is no specific cure or vaccine.
The UN agency advises people to:
Frequently wash their hands with an alcohol-based hand rub or warm water and soap
Cover their mouth and nose with a flexed elbow or tissue when sneezing or coughing
Avoid close contact with anyone who has a fever or cough
Seek early medical help if they have a fever, cough and difficulty breathing, and share their travel history with healthcare providers
Many countries are now enforcing or recommending curfews or lockdowns. 
In the UK, NHS advice is that anyone with symptoms should stay at home for at least 7 days.
If you live with other people, they should stay at home for at least 14 days, to avoid spreading the infection outside the home.



Was this helpful?







Thank you for your feedback.

The ban on large events comes as Europe struggles to contain the epidemic.
Switzerland’s federal office of public health has reported 15 cases of the virus, including in the Geneva, Zurich and Basel city cantons.


Sign up to the daily Business Today email or follow Guardian Business on Twitter at @BusinessDesk
Many carmakers had already asked employees from infected areas to avoid travelling to the motor show. However, the organisers had held off cancelling the event, with most of the exhibition stands already built and cars ready to be shipped in around the world to the giant exhibition centre beside Geneva airport.
Maurice Turrettini, the chairman of the show’s board, said: “We regret this situation, but the health of all participants is our and our exhibitors’ top priority. This is a case of force majeure and a tremendous loss for the manufacturers who have invested massively in their presence in Geneva. However, we are convinced that they will understand this decision.”
The organisers had sent participants an email as recently as Wednesday saying the event would go ahead as planned, despite Switzerland reporting its first case of Covid-19.
On Friday, before the ban was announced, the motor show’s statement said it was “carefully observing the situation” but made no reference to possible cancellation. It also pointed to World Health Organization advice to “follow good respiratory hygiene”.


Topics



Switzerland






Automotive industry




Europe




Coronavirus outbreak




World Health Organization




news






Share on Facebook






Share on Twitter






Share via Email






Share on LinkedIn






Share on Pinterest






Share on WhatsApp






Share on Messenger








Reuse this content




 