Mikel Arteta recovering well as Arsenal reopen training facilities

Mikel Arteta is on the road to recovery after being diagnosed with coronavirus a week ago, and Arsenal’s training facilities have reopened for everyday maintenance after a deep clean.
Around 100 Arsenal personnel, including the first-team squad and coaching staff, have been self-isolating since Arteta’s positive test. They were set to return to training next Tuesday but that looks far from certain now the Premier League will not resume before 30 April. The club are working through the implications of that decision for their daily schedule, a process made difficult by the fast-moving wider situation dictating events.



Premier League, EFL and WSL football will not restart before 30 April







Read more





Arteta is communicating from home with colleagues. “We’re pleased to say Mikel is feeling much better,” read part of a lengthy open letter to fans in the name of directors, players and staff. “He’s in good spirits, doing detailed planning with the coaches and speaking to the players regularly.”
A small workforce are maintaining the London Colney and Hale End training centres’ pitches and facilities for whenever training gets the go-ahead. The Arsenal women’s and academy teams are also staying at home.
Arsenal pledged their support to the local community, in Islington, during the coronavirus outbreak. Discussions about ways to support the area’s more vulnerable groups have included the potential for online coaching and teaching, and staff volunteering to have regular phone contact with elderly people who feel isolated. The club are also looking at ways to support their many casual workers.
Manchester United have promised to pay their 3,000 casual staff even if the remaining games are cancelled or played behind closed doors. United said in a statement: “This goodwill gesture reflects the club’s desire to reduce the financial uncertainty facing its casual workforce.”


Topics



Arsenal






Coronavirus outbreak




news






Share on Facebook






Share on Twitter






Share via Email






Share on LinkedIn






Share on Pinterest






Share on WhatsApp






Share on Messenger








Reuse this content




 