The 6 March Guardian Weekly: coronavirus – the worst-case scenario

We first reported on a mystery illness in the Chinese city of Wuhan at the start of January. Since then, the virus has spread around the world, killing more than 3,000 people and causing economic chaos. A week after experts warned of a potential tipping point, the World Health Organization said the planet was in “uncharted territory” but the growing epidemic could be contained with the right measures.
In this week’s cover story, we look at some of the past week’s big developments, while Peter Beaumont reports on how the virus spread around Europe from northern Italy. And economics correspondent Richard Partington ponders the role that fiscal protectionism plays in impeding efforts to stop its spread.
For many Britons, the decision to leave the European Union felt almost like a physical removal from the rest of the continent. Britain may be a more insular country than it was on 30 January, but it remains part of Europe. That is partly why the Guardian has launched This is Europe, an ongoing commitment to reporting on the challenges facing Europe – from perspectives both British and not.
The series begins this week with a fascinating report from our European team on the hollowing out of some EU member states, as young people leave the regions to live in major cities or wealthier nations. What impact, for instance, will eastern Germany’s low percentage of young adults have on the region’s infrastructure and politics? 



Britain is leaving Europe. The Guardian is not | Katharine Viner







Read more





Later in the magazine you’ll find more This is Europe content including Timothy Garton Ash on the future of Europe (including Britain) as a superpower and Alexis Petridis, our chief music critic, on the end of a legendary Berlin club night.
The near decade-long war in Syria is approaching its final stages, with Russia and Turkey exchanging fire. Middle East correspondent Martin Chulov analyses attacks by the Russians on Turkish troops and Turkey’s response attacks on the Syrian national army.
Another key development in the region last week was Ankara’s decision not to stop refugees stuck in Turkey from entering the EU through borders with Greece and Bulgaria.
The move prompted violent scenes at border crossings and evoked memories  of 2015, when thousands of people battered by wars in Syria and beyond made their way to Europe. Ghaith Abdul-Ahad was on the ground in Turkey as a group of migrants made a dash for the border.
Subscribe here


Topics







Coronavirus outbreak




Inside Guardian Weekly






Italy






Share on Facebook






Share on Twitter






Share via Email






Share on LinkedIn






Share on Pinterest






Share on WhatsApp






Share on Messenger








Reuse this content




 