York University student is one of two in UK to test positive for coronavirus

One of the first two people to test positive for coronavirus in the UK is a student at the University of York.
The pair – two members of the same family – are being treated at a specialist unit in Newcastle. They had checked into the Staycity apartment-hotel in York on Wednesday and were taken to hospital that evening.
Health chiefs confirmed on Friday that two people had tested positive for the virus, which has killed 259 people in China.



Families uneasy at proximity to coronavirus quarantine site







Read more





The university’s vice-chancellor, Prof Charlie Jeffery, said: “Our immediate concerns are for the affected student and family, along with the health and continued wellbeing of our students, staff, and the residents and visitors of our city.
“We understand this development will cause concern and anxiety. I want to reassure our students, staff and the wider community that we are working closely with the lead agency, Public Health England, and other agencies to manage this situation.”
He stressed that the university would continue to operate as normal. “I want to reiterate to students, staff, parents and visitors that we’re working with our partners across the city to ensure that York and the university remain a safe and welcoming place to live, work and visit.”
The university students’ union president, Samara Jones, said many students were likely to be worried by the news. “The student community at York is a tight-knit, global community and we will continue to support one another at this time,” she said. 
“I would encourage students with any questions to keep an eye on the university website for any developments and key information. Our dedicated helpline will remain open over the weekend.” 
A spokesman confirmed that the university was continuing to operate as normal. He said: “We are monitoring the situation closely and we continue to provide as much advice, care and support as we can to our university community. If people have any concerns about their health in relation to suspected coronavirus, we ask that they follow current PHE advice and contact NHS 111.”
Staycity said the apartment involved had been thoroughly disinfected and that PHE had been providing support.
The patients are being treated by Newcastle-upon-Tyne hospitals NHS foundation trust in its specialist Airborne High Consequences Infectious Disease Centre (HCID).
Prof Sharon Peacock said PHE was contacting people who had close contact – defined as being within two metres of the infected person for 15 minutes – with the pair.


Topics



Coronavirus outbreak






York




Newcastle




Infectious diseases




Universities




news






Share on Facebook






Share on Twitter






Share via Email






Share on LinkedIn






Share on Pinterest






Share on WhatsApp






Share on Messenger








Reuse this content




 