UK lorry drivers 'denied access to bathrooms' over virus fears

Lorry drivers in the frontline of maintaining vital food and other supplies are being “ostracised” by being denied access to toilet and handwashing facilities at hubs servicing major UK companies including Tesco and Boots, it is claimed.
Images were also provided of groups of drivers being asked to sit in “drivers’ waiting rooms” at distribution centres in Nottingham and Hinkley rather than being allowed to wait in their cabs.
A letter from Public Health England (PHE) stressing the need to allow access to facilities is now being circulated by the Road Haulage Association (RHA) to drivers who can produce it when they are denied the right to use washrooms.



UK supermarkets struggle to cope with surge in online orders







Read more





The RHA, which represents the hauliers’ industry, said the PHE was “appalled” when it raised the matter following numerous complaints from members about distribution centres denying drivers the use of toilets.
“This behaviour from distribution centres is simply not acceptable. Preventing drivers from using toilets is illegal,” said the RHA’s managing director, Rod McKenzie.
“Preventing them from accessing hygiene facilities during an international pandemic is absurd.”
A Boots spokesperson said the company had always asked warehouse delivery drivers to wait in designated waiting areas rather than their cabs, while their deliveries are being unloaded for health and safety reasons.
But it added: “We are currently exploring additional locations on site for our drivers to wait to allow for the recommended social distancing guidelines and are taking extra measures to ensure the cleanliness and hygiene within the warehouse and waiting areas.”
Tesco said: “We take the health and safety of our colleagues extremely seriously and have worked with our suppliers to put in place new guidelines for distribution drivers which take effect this evening.”
“These guidelines put in place provisions to minimise close contact with other colleagues and supplier drivers and provide hand-washing facilities across all our distribution centres.”
All haulage drivers are being encouraged to carry a copy of the PHE letter, which says that “there is no health reason to deny access to toilet facilities to freight drivers”.
Quick guide What are coronavirus symptoms and should I go to a doctor?  
 Show 
 Hide  


What is Covid-19?

It is caused by a member of the coronavirus family that has never been encountered before. Like other coronaviruses, it has come from animals.



What are the symptoms this coronavirus causes?

The virus can cause pneumonia-like symptoms. Those who have fallen ill are reported to suffer coughs, fever and breathing difficulties.
In the UK, the National Heath Service has defined the symptoms as:
a high temperature - you feel hot to touch on your chest or back
a new continuous cough - this means you've started coughing repeatedly



Should I go to the doctor if I have a cough?

Medical advice varies around the world - with many countries imposing travel bans and lockdowns to try and prevent the spread of the virus. In many place people are being told to stay at home rather than visit a doctor of hospital in person. Check with your local authorities.
In the UK, NHS advice is that anyone with symptoms should stay at home for at least 7 days. If you live with other people, they should stay at home for at least 14 days, to avoid spreading the infection outside the home.



Is the virus being transmitted from one person to another?

Yes. China’s national health commission confirmed human-to-human transmission in January.



How many people have been affected?

China’s national health commission confirmed human-to-human transmission in January. As of 19 March, more than 219,000 people have been infected in more than 150 countries, according to the Johns Hopkins University Center for Systems Science and Engineering.
There have been over 8,900 deaths globally. Just over 3,200 of those deaths have occurred in mainland China. Many of those who have died had underlying health conditions, which the coronavirus complicated.
More than 84,000 people are recorded as having recovered from the coronavirus.




Was this helpful?







Thank you for your feedback.

Beneath a photo circulating on social media showing what was said to be a waiting room at a distribution centre in Nottingham, one driver wrote of his experience after delivering hundreds of thousands of tablets.
“I asked if as a driver I still had to sit in this so-called drivers’ rest room … surrounded by other drivers coughing and spluttering … and was told yes you do … you cannot sit in the cab due to health and safety regulations.”
Another photo at a different hub showed a printed notice stating: “Drivers. Given the current concerns over the coronavirus we must refuse you using the toilet due to the welfare of our employees. Thank you for your cooperation. The management.”
A Health Service Executive spokesperson said: “We are concerned about these reports. Any prevention of a driver to access welfare facilities is a breach of law, but more importantly is not the decent thing to do.”
The controversy comes as workers in other sectors also expressed concern at conditions. They included staff at the pub chain Wetherspoon, who told the Guardian of fears about having to continue working in busy pub environments without masks, hand gel or other protective equipment.
They spoke out as the company announced that its pubs would remain open – but customers will pay by card, avoid standing at the bar and sit at alternate tables.
“We’re effectively going to become Petri dishes,” said one worker who said that he and others should be provided with hand gel, gloves and face masks.
“We come into contact all day with the general public, we handle money, dirty plates, glasses, sometimes bodily fluids, and the fact we can’t wear a mask/gloves front of house is making people feel on edge. We of course are washing our hands as often as possible but it’s just bizarre we aren’t allowed to protect ourselves.”
He and others also called for the government to issue an order shutting down the pub trade, adding the £95-a-week statutory sick pay which employees would receive would barely go towards meeting rental and other costs.
Meanwhile, a trade union representing so-called gig economy workers called on Deliveroo to immediately reform its Covid-19 hardship fund. The Independent Workers Union of Great Britain (IWGB) said it had been set up in a way which made it impossible for many riders that are genuinely sick or self-isolating to claim the payments.
One Deliveroo driver in Sheffield said he felt torn over whether he should go back to work seven days after he came down with flu-like symptoms and was denied access the company’s Covid-19 fund.
The driver, a father-of-three who preferred not to be named, said he had been left struggling to pay his rent and bills and to buy food for his family after losing a week’s worth of pay from his delivery work.
He says the automated NHS 111 would not supply him with a sick note and, although he was able to get through to his local family practice, a GP told him there was no capacity for them to do so either.

He said: ”Now I’m thinking, is it really worth it? I’m feeling a bit better now, I’m thinking I’m just going to self-isolate until Saturday [the seventh day after the symptoms began]. I’ve got bills, rent, I’ve got three kids that are at home now.
“It feels a bit selfish for me to go out to work and not think about other people. If I pass my germs on to them I couldn’t live with myself. But then again, if I don’t go out to work I don’t eat. I’ve got rent and bills to pay. It’s such a dilemma, I’m seriously getting pulled from left to right ... do I take the gamble or not?
Deliveroo and Boots have been approached for comment.


Topics



Coronavirus outbreak






Couriers/delivery industry




Infectious diseases




Gig economy




Online shopping




news






Share on Facebook






Share on Twitter






Share via Email






Share on LinkedIn






Share on Pinterest






Share on WhatsApp






Share on Messenger








Reuse this content




 