London paramedics rationed to one face mask between two

Paramedics attending people who could be infected with the coronavirus were told only one person in each team of two could wear a face mask, with the other instructed to stand two metres away from the patient if “clinically appropriate”.
The message was sent from controllers to London Ambulance Service (LAS) crews at 3am on Tuesday, prompting paramedics to question why they were ordered to ration face masks.
A directive sent to ambulance terminals said that “due to high call demand there is a request for crew to utilise 1x mask whilst stock is mobilised to sites.”
It went on: “The attending clinician to wear a mask and the remaining clinician to stand 2 metres from the patient where clinically appropriate.”
The LAS said it was trying to preserve protective equipment. In a private Facebook group where the issue was raised, an LAS gold group (strategic operations) spokesperson said the policy was in place to conserve equipment.
Doctors and nurses have warned that frontline NHS staff are at risk of dying after protective gear requirements for health workers treating those infected with Covid-19 were downgraded last week, while shortages appear to be widespread across the health service amid massively increased demand.
NHS England’s chief operating officer, Amanda Pritchard, on Tuesday accepted there had been distribution issues that meant protective equipment such as face masks, goggles and aprons were not in the right place across the health service.
The LAS gold group spokesperson said: “For our patients that are clinically stable only using 1 set of PPE will help preserve stock. This is for CoV ‘possible’ (the vast majority). Hope that helps. Thank you for all your help and understanding.”
An LAS spokesperson told the Guardian that PPE guidance was constantly under review. “We have sufficient stocks of protective equipment, including face masks, but are taking all sensible steps to secure stock as well as ensure we preserve supplies where possible.”

Meanwhile, the GMB union, which represents ambulance workers, said crews arrived for their shifts on Tuesday to find insufficient supplies of hand sanitisers, face masks and wipes in their vehicles.
“Ambulance trusts are desperately trying to get equipment to their staff but not enough is coming through the supply chain,” said Jason Dicker, a paramedic on the south-east coast and local GMB branch secretary.
“There’s a reason why an ambulance crew is an ambulance crew, my crewmate needs to be right beside me. It’s highly unacceptable and dangerous for us to be separated due to equipment shortages.”
The NHS stressed there were sufficient supplies of equipment but conceded there had been distribution issues. “We have been assured that there is sufficient supply available nationally,” Pritchard told MPs during a health and social care committee meeting.
“We have had the benefit of being able to release our influenza stockpile and our EU exit stockpile, so nationally we are currently assured that we do have the adequate supply we need.
“However, we are aware that there have been some local distribution problems so we haven’t necessarily got the kit in the right place.”


Topics



Coronavirus outbreak






Infectious diseases




London




news






Share on Facebook






Share on Twitter






Share via Email






Share on LinkedIn






Share on Pinterest






Share on WhatsApp






Share on Messenger








Reuse this content




 