Ben Youngs just short of the line as he approaches his 100th cap

In an ideal world for Ben Youngs, he will finish the Six Nations campaign in two weeks’ time in Rome with another winner’s medal, having become the second player to win 100 England caps. Youngs, however, is only too aware of the obstacles to overcome before then.
The threat of postponed or cancelled matches looms large over the rest of the Six Nations, potentially jeopardising England’s matches against Wales next Saturday and particularly in Italy the following week. If either ends up not being played, Youngs, currently on 98 caps, will have to wait to reach his century and as he is almost certain to sit out the summer tour of Japan – as the vast majority of last year’s World Cup squad will do – it may take a while.
Injury could also strike, as happened to Ireland’s Cian Healy when winning his 98th cap against England last Sunday, and there are numerous examples of players falling just short of three figures in recent years. Dylan Hartley has been stranded on 97; Dan Cole is on 95 and it is hard to see him adding to those; while the former Wales scrum-half Mike Phillips finished his career with 99, including his five for the British & Irish Lions.



Wales need time to adapt to their new coach, says Alun Wyn Jones







Read more





“Let’s not go there,” says Youngs. “Yes it is there, but equally there are plenty of people who have got near it and something’s got in the way. I was speaking to Cian Healy after the game he was injured in and he’s out for the remainder on 98. I’ll take it week by week.”
Youngs is still only 30 and it pays to remember that he is the youngest scrum-half in England’s training squad – the inclusion of Alex Mitchell as an apprentice notwithstanding – with Willi Heinz three years his senior. Sooner or later Eddie Jones must look to blood younger options and if he finally sees fit to in the autumn, Youngs’s position may come under threat. Jones’s decision to drop him to the bench against Scotland after his poor form in the World Cup final continued against France only added to the theory that it is time to turn to younger scrum-halves.
“I have a huge desire to be here,” Youngs says. “As long as you look after yourself mentally and physically you’re always going to be in a good position. Wigglesworth is still going strong, Peter Stringer … they played scrum-half, so those are the guys I look to. They are perfect examples of guys who have looked after themselves physically and mentally and been able to do it for a long time. Just because someone has a theory about when the candle should burn out, no one knows you better than you. It’s always a personal thing.”


 
 

 
 Facebook 
 
 Twitter 
 
 Pinterest 


 Ben Youngs shares a joke with England head coach Eddie Jones during training. Photograph: Andrew Couldridge/Action Images via Reuters
When Jones first arrived he threw Youngs a packet of sweets in front of the rest of the squad – a not-so-subtle hint that he could be in better shape. Since then Youngs has set about using everything at his disposal to maximise his performance levels.
“When Eddie came in he put a huge emphasis on recovery and looking after yourself. Post-training, pre-game and that’s another area I’ve broadened my mind on,” he says. “Ice baths, saunas, stretching, all those things. Also getting away from the game as well because when you’re in it there’s no denying that when you’re in it with your club or country you need that mental release. All those things add a huge benefit. It’s really noticeable over the last few years.
“There’s yoga. It’s another area. Not that we’re very flexible, we’re a joke. If you go in there you just relax, have a laugh watching some of the props hold these poses. There are some lads trying to get their arms above their head, which is a challenge.”



Paris summit will attempt to break possible Six Nations deadlock | Paul Rees







Read more





While the cancellation of Ireland’s match against Italy drastically muddies the waters, it is still possible for England to clinch the Six Nations title in Rome on 14 March. First, however, Wales come to Twickenham next Saturday, with Youngs hoping to keep his starting place and reproducing the kind of performance that put Ireland to the sword.
“All we can do is control what we do and make sure we play well and get the victories,” he says. “My role [against Ireland] was just different to what it was against Scotland. When your pack gets on the front foot and dominates like it did, as a half-back you have the luxury of then being able to do things, manipulate space, kick on the front foot. It makes the job easier. I didn’t feel like there was a point to prove.
“I’ll do whatever role Eddie wants me to do. Look, it’s always been the case since he walked through the door in 2016 that you’ve got two guys as scrum-halves trying to do 80 minutes together to give the team the best chance. My opinion on that will never change.”


Topics



England rugby union team




The Observer






Six Nations 2020




Six Nations




Rugby union




Coronavirus outbreak




features






Share on Facebook






Share on Twitter






Share via Email






Share on LinkedIn






Share on Pinterest






Share on WhatsApp






Share on Messenger








Reuse this content




 