Coronavirus testing explained: how does it work and how quickly can you get a response in Australia?

Across Australia, thousands of people everyday are being tested for the virus that causes the respiratory illness Covid-19.
Governments around the world, including in Australia, are working against a backlog of tests, with global supplies of materials failing to meet the demand created by the pandemic.
The country’s chief medical officer, Brendan Murphy, has said the shortage of testing materials is only temporary.
By 17 March 2020, more than 80,000 Covid-19 tests had been carried out in Australia.
As the disease continues to spread, many more thousands of Australians will be tested. So what should we expect, and how is it done?
What happens when people are tested for Covid-19?
Almost all tests currently being carried out in Australia start with a sample being taken either from the nose or the back of the throat, or both, using a special swab.



So you think you have coronavirus: what Australians should do if they are unwell







Read more





Michael Harrison, a pathologist and the CEO of Brisbane-based pathology business Sullivan Nicolaides, says his company is currently running about 1,500 tests a day through their Brisbane laboratory.
Harrison says: “The nose and the back of the throat are the two sites where the virus is replicating. So the swabs are picking up those cells where the virus might be. We put the swabs into a solution that releases the cells.”
The swab tests are used to match the genetic material captured on the swab with the genetic code of Covid-19 .
Medical staff taking the samples need to wear personal protective equipment including gloves, gowns, masks and face shields.
Dr Chance Pistoll, a GP in Melbourne and lecturer in primary care at the University of Melbourne, says it’s crucial that staff have enough protective equipment available.
He said anyone who thinks they may have the virus should call ahead and follow any systems that surgeries and medical centres have set up to protect patients, other people and medical staff.
Pistoll says if someone is tested for Covid-19, it is vital they self-isolate until they get the results.
He said: “You must be in self-isolation until you know the result. If you have been tested, you should presume you have it until you know that you don’t.
“And if you don’t hear anything, don’t presume it was negative. People should get a call or a message through and if they don’t hear anything, they should call before they take themselves out of isolation.”
What happens to the samples from a Covid-19 test?
Once the specimens are taken and sealed, they’re transported to a laboratory where they are then tested in batches using a technique known as polymerase chain reaction – or PCR.



Australia's coronavirus self-isolation rules: who has to do it and how it works







Read more





Harrison says: “We’re testing around the clock and on weekends.”
Samples go through a mostly-automated process to extract the genetic material before they’re placed into a PCR machine in batches.
“From the point where we press go to the test being completed is in most cases about six hours,” he says.
Prof Sharon Lewin, director of the Doherty Institute, told Guardian Australia the PCR technique being used to test for Covid-19 is also used for many other viruses, including HIV, Hepatitis C and influenzas.
“The way to do this is to find the genetic material of the virus. PCR amplifies the genetic material so that you can easily detect it.”
Is this testing method unique to Covid-19?
Lewin says the ingredients for testing for Covid-19 are generic, but an element of the test known as the primer – or hook – that’s used to match the genetic material with the virus that causes Covid-19 is unique.
Blood tests are also being carried out, that can detect if a person has previously been exposed to the virus. These tests, says Lewin, are useful for knowing if a person may have developed immunity.
“That tells us if a healthcare worker can go back to work,” she said.
How long before people get results?
From the point that a person is tested, a sample has to be transported to a laboratory and put through the test. The results then need to be communicated to the medical professionals and back to the patient themselves.
Harrison says at the moment, it is taking his laboratory up to 48 hours from the time of collection to patients learning the result. Pistoll says in Victoria, patients are being told to expect a test result between 48 and 72 hours.



Australia must dramatically expand its coronavirus testing regime, leading virologist says







Read more





Does it matter how quickly Covid-19 tests are completed?
Dr Gaetan Burgio, of Australian National University’s John Curtin School of Medical Research, says how quickly a test is returned, “depends on the technology (the robotics), the reagents available, the number of technicians and the protocol to perform the test. Some are better equipped than others, hence a difference in the delivery.”
But he says “speed is very important” in a pandemic.
“The patients are, in principle, isolated awaiting the results but these [patients] might not comply. Delivering results quickly enables us to rapidly detect the positives and follow up those patients in isolation or quarantine.
“Rapid detection reduces the number of patients that are unnecessarily followed up. In a context of a pandemic with thousand of patients to test within a day, this is crucial.”
Will there be any different, faster Covid-19 tests?
Lewin says rapid tests for other viruses already exist that have a turnaround time of 30 minutes and that it was likely faster tests would be available in Australia in the future.
Experts have told Guardian Australia that a new rapid test with a 15-minute turnaround could take the strain off pathology services across the country.
But experts also warned these tests would likely be less accurate than lab-based PCR tests because they looked for antibodies, rather than the virus itself.
This could return a false-negative, one virologist said, if the test was taken at the wrong stage of a person’s illness.


Topics



Coronavirus outbreak






Health




explainers






Share on Facebook






Share on Twitter






Share via Email






Share on LinkedIn






Share on Pinterest






Share on WhatsApp






Share on Messenger








Reuse this content




 