To punters, Cheltenham Festival is like Christmas for grown-ups

In 1990, 147,000 racegoers were at Cheltenham over the course of what was then a three-day National Hunt Festival meeting. This week, despite the shadow cast by the coronavirus and much uncertainty in recent days over whether it would happen at all, the attendance over four days should reach 250,000 or more, as it has for the past three years, and there will be huge relief mixed with the jubilation as the grandstand greets the start of the Supreme Novice Hurdle with its traditional, blood-curdling roar.
For those with no interest in the sport of kings, it is just another race meeting. For devotees of jumping, it is Christmas for grown-ups, the fixture in the calendar that is anticipated like no other, and a large part of its appeal is that the more it grows and changes, the more it stays the same. Despite the huge increase in attendance and the many thousands of city dwellers who will cram on to trains at Paddington this week, Cheltenham remains a celebration of jump racing and its country roots.



Paul Townend: 'Every jockey wants to have Ruby Walsh’s success'







Read more





The faces change, of course, on both sides of the running rail, but the core audience for the Festival is still essentially the same, and many at the course on Tuesday will remember the bitter disappointment of losing the Festival to foot-and-mouth in 2001. For weeks now, the approach of Covid-19 has threatened a similar outcome. The first case in Cheltenham itself was confirmed on Monday. With the government still satisfied that sporting events should continue, however, it is time to hold tight and fire the annual rollercoaster into motion.
The themes are timeless: Britain versus Ireland, old warriors versus young pretenders, proven champions versus maybes and wannabes. And amid the flashy new-money owners like Michael O’Leary and Rich Ricci, there is still room for someone like Andrew Gemmell, whose Paisley Park could be the shortest-priced favourite of the week when he returns to defend his title in Thursday’s Stayers’ Hurdle.
After the damning headlines that have swirled around Sheikh Mohammed, the Flat’s leading owner, in recent days, the memory of Paisley Park’s victory last year feels like something of an antidote. The Sheikh, oddly enough, had a winner at that long-ago Festival in 1990, when Kribensis took the Champion Hurdle. That, though, feels like a lifetime ago, and the possible fallout for Flat racing of his current travails will be as far from the racegoers’ minds this week as Doncaster is from Dubai.


 
 

 
 Facebook 
 
 Twitter 
 
 Pinterest 


 Double Grand National winner Tiger Roll and Keith Donoghue easily win the Glenfarclas Cross Country Chase during last year’s Festival. Photograph: Steve Davies/racingfotos.com/REX/Shutterstock
They will be more interested in finding out whether Rachael Blackmore can become the first female winner of the trophy for the week’s leading rider, and hopefully transfixed as Altior, Chacun Pour Soi and Defi Du Seuil duel for the Champion Chase on Wednesday, though Altior’s participation remains in the balance. Tiger Roll, the dual Grand National winner, will be in town for the Cross Country Chase the same day, while Frodon and Bryony Frost also return for Ryanair on Thursday.
Add in one of the most open Gold Cups for years on Friday and the potential for some huge swings in fortune between punters and bookies is obvious, and nor is it entirely certain who the grandees and executives in the corporate boxes will be rooting for. If Sheikh Mohammed’s money is hugely important on the Flat, then the income generated from betting at the Cheltenham Festival is just as significant, both to jumping and, increasingly, racing as a whole.
As recently as 2013 the top 40 races of the year by turnover at Ladbrokes included 15 of the Festival’s 28 contests. Last year, it was up to 25, and there is little sign that the trend has peaked. While the Grand National at Aintree in April remains the biggest single betting race of the year, the combined might of Cheltenham’s four days far outweighs Aintree’s main event in terms of its significance for racing’s finances.



Rachael Blackmore set for thrills up the hill on Cheltenham favourites







Read more





Why? Because racing gets a slice of bookmakers’ profits, not their turnover, and a run of winning favourites can put a seven-figure dent in the sport’s income. In January last year, racing was on course to make £89m from its levy on betting profits by the end of March. The eventual figure was £78m, and around half of the £11m hole was thought to result from a golden eight-race run for the punters on the second and third afternoons when seven favourites and a second-favourite – including Altior, Paisley Park and Frodon – did the business.
An even sprinkling of winning favourites over the four days keeps turnover ticking over and interest kindled. An unbroken sequence, though, can pulverise the books, as winnings are played up and nothing returns to the satchels by the end of the day. Instead, it finds its way into the local economy as part of the Festival’s £100m footprint, as racegoers celebrate winners, drown sorrows and cram a year’s worth of fevered anticipation into just four days.
All this seemed at risk last week as the creeping shadow of coronavirus prompted fears that sporting events could be cancelled or at least staged behind closed doors. And while the Cheltenham Festival has survived, there is no way to know how the coming weeks will unfold. The Grand National in three weeks’ time, when Tiger Roll is due to go for an unprecedented third consecutive victory, is far from certain to go ahead as planned.
But that, like so much else for racing fans in Cheltenham Festival week, is for another day. Will the coronavirus be on the minds of racegoers? Of course. Will it affect the attendance? Perhaps. But will it be allowed to get in the way? No chance at all.
Quick guide Henderson sweating on improving Altior  
 Show 
 Hide  

Nicky Henderson hopes that Altior can be persuaded to believe in his recovery from lameness as the trainer desperately tries to get his star ready for Wednesday's Queen Mother Champion Chase. The horse was said to have made good progress overnight into Monday but was still not quite fit to race.
“He’s nothing like as touchy on the splint today as he was,” Henderson reported. “When you pressed it he was sore, but he’s much less reactive today and he is much sounder. I think a lot of it is, he actually needs to sort of get a bit of belief in himself again. It’s nothing like as sore, so the horse just needs to believe.”
Sunday’s setback for Altior, winner of the Champion Chase for the last two years, threatens to rob this week’s Cheltenham Festival of its most anticipated clash. The three-way battle between him, Defi Du Seuil and Chacun Pour Soi has been widely anticipated for months.
“If it continues to improve as much as it has done since last night to this morning, he’s got every chance,” added Henderson, who said he was in -regular contact with British Horseracing Authority vets as to Altior’s progress. “We have to give him every chance, it’s only right. If it was today, no you wouldn’t [run], but the improvement has been significant enough to justify leaving him in and seeing how we are going tomorrow. If necessary, we’ll have to take it to the wire.”
The going at Cheltenham on Monday was described as soft, good to soft in places but 5mm of forecast overnight rain is expected to make it soft all round for Tuesday's action. Chris Cook




Was this helpful?







Thank you for your feedback.



Topics



Cheltenham Festival 2020






Cheltenham




Cheltenham Festival




Horse racing




features






Share on Facebook






Share on Twitter






Share via Email






Share on LinkedIn






Share on Pinterest






Share on WhatsApp






Share on Messenger








Reuse this content




 