'Zero prospect' of London lockdown involving movement limits, says No 10

There is “zero prospect” of a London lockdown involving limits on movement but new restrictions could be put in place on pubs and cafes to prevent the spread of coronavirus in the capital, the government has said.
The prime minister’s official spokesperson sought to quash overnight reports that there would be limits on transport or on who can enter or leave London, saying there was also no truth to reports that key workers would be asked to present papers to prove their status.
But with people still being asked to avoid congregating in public, details of new steps to slow the virus in London – where it is spreading faster than anywhere else in the UK – are expected to be released later and are likely to include new conditions on pubs, cafes, bars and theatres.
Graphic
The spokesperson said: “There are no plans to close down the transport network in London and there is zero prospect of any restriction being placed on travelling in or out of London. The prime minister and his advisers have set out the need for social distancing measures to limit the spread of the virus and to protect lives.
“What we’re focused on is ensuring as many people as possible take that advice and don’t unnecessarily put themselves in a position where they could be spreading coronavirus.”
He said speculation that households could be limited to only one person at a time leaving their home were untrue and he dismissed claims that people could be fined if they left their homes.
Sweeping changes to ordinary life in the capital are already in place, with Transport for London announcing on Wednesday night that it was closing 40 tube stations that are not interchange hubs. A reduced service is expected on the underground and buses.

The London mayor, Sadiq Khan, said it was critical that far fewer people used the transport network but it was not a complete shutdown. He said tougher measures including bans might be needed and curtailing civil liberties was necessary to save lives.
Speaking on Thursday morning to the London assembly, Khan was asked if tougher measures and bans were coming. He said: “The most important human right is the one to live. It’s actually article two of the Human Rights Act. And so sometimes our liberties and human rights need to be changed, curtailed, infringed – use whatever word you want – for reasons that are sensible, justifiable. A key thing is for it to be proportionate.”
Khan said no one wanted to order sweeping and unprecedented measures such as closing schools. “But these are extraordinary times. It’s very important we understand the consequence of people’s liberties and human rights not being deprived or curtailed, suspended, is lives being lost.”
Khan, a former human rights lawyer, was critical of what he said was ambiguous information being released by the government, and said bans might be needed to stop people gathering in bars and restaurants. “We are not there yet,” he said. “The advice from the government is just advice. I think that provides a mixed message. It’s clearly not been clear enough. We may move to a situation where we move from advice to bans.”
Quick guide What to do if you have coronavirus symptoms in the UK  
 Show 
 Hide  

Symptoms are defined as either:
a high temperature - you feel hot to touch on your chest or back
a new continuous cough - this means you've started coughing repeatedly
NHS advice is that anyone with symptoms should stay at home for at least 7 days.
If you live with other people, they should stay at home for at least 14 days, to avoid spreading the infection outside the home.
After 14 days, anyone you live with who does not have symptoms can return to their normal routine. But, if anyone in your home gets symptoms, they should stay at home for 7 days from the day their symptoms start. Even if it means they're at home for longer than 14 days.
Information: If you live with someone who is 70 or over, has a long-term condition, is pregnant or has a weakened immune system, try to find somewhere else for them to stay for 14 days.
If you have to stay at home together, try to keep away from each other as much as possible.
After 7 days, if you no longer have a high temperature you can return to your normal routine.
If you still have a high temperature, stay at home until your temperature returns to normal.
If you still have a cough after 7 days, but your temperature is normal, you do not need to continue staying at home. A cough can last for several weeks after the infection has gone.
Source: NHS England on 18 March 2020




Was this helpful?







Thank you for your feedback.

He said those in London must follow the advice and cease all but essential travel. “I want to see more Londoners following the expert advice.”
The government is due to release further details of shielding advice for the 1.4 million people in Britain with underlying health conditions.
The chancellor, Rishi Sunak, is in talks with unions and business leaders to draw up the package of measures to protect people who might find themselves out of work because of the health crisis. The list of key workers is also due to be published on Thursday as schools prepare to close.
Boris Johnson’s comments that he was prepared to take “further and faster” action to deal with the virus led to widespread speculation that London was close to having much more restrictive measures.
The spokesman said: “The PM has been clear that what we want people to do is follow the very good advice which is particularly pertinent in London that people should avoid unnecessary social contact so as to limit the spread of this disease and save lives.”



Topics



London






Coronavirus outbreak




news






Share on Facebook






Share on Twitter






Share via Email






Share on LinkedIn






Share on Pinterest






Share on WhatsApp






Share on Messenger








Reuse this content




 