Splendid isolation: what will you learn?

Few of us, I suspect, will forget the strange days of March 2020. There is something in the air, a sense of the slow-motion shutdown of public life in dozens of countries. Quiet streets, empty buses, vacant offices.
If that feels scary, then there is another way of looking at things. It’s very possible that you and I might have a little more time on our hands in coming weeks, as public events dwindle, holidays are cancelled, travel options dry up, working-from-home days proliferate and millions self-isolate.
And therein lies the opportunity from this crisis. A chance to pivot away from the routine of your everyday life, do something different, pick up some new skills. As Oliver Balch explained recently in this lovely little Upside piece, the digital world means it has never been easier to learn something new, whether that is bike maintenance, barbering or baking.
What could you learn in a few short weeks? That rather depends on your dedication, I suspect. Sewing, juggling, CPR, drawing, wood turning, the Cyrillic alphabet, solving cryptic crosswords, cooking, meditation, temari, knitting, video editing, offspin, yoga, coding, diving (though this might be difficult in your front room), the accordion … the list is endless.
So how about it? What will you learn? Let us know. Lindsey Smith has already been in touch: “I have planned my fortnight in self-isolation. The house will be spring cleaned, books read, but I may not have enough loo paper …”
Of course, you’ll have to leave a little time in your study schedule for reading the best Upside pieces of the week. This week that is just 12 minutes:
• The new-look department store that doesn’t sell stuff. Three-minute read


 
 

 
 Facebook 
 
 Twitter 
 
 Pinterest 


 The thrill of the mall. Photograph: Oliver Balch
• The baker who recycles old bread. One-minute loaf
• The EU green deal – can it save the world? Four-minute read
• Here comes the sun canoe. Two-minute read
• Italy puts a brave face on it all. Two-minute read


 
 

 
 Facebook 
 
 Twitter 
 
 Pinterest 


 Everything’s gonna be all right Photograph: Marta Achler/Guardian Community
Lucky numbers
It was, in truth, not a great week to be an investor (though don’t be fooled by the headlines about billions being wiped off share markets: these things have a habit of turning around). But if you were a Tunisian garlic grower, things were definitely looking up.
Indeed, Covid-19 – while still clearly a supremely grave global event – continues to produce silver linings: China’s carbon emissions fell by one quarter as a result of its containment measures. Three quarters of Chinese virus patients have now recovered. New case numbers are falling in South Korea and other east Asian nations.
Meanwhile this article demonstrates how social distancing, destined to become one of the words of the year, really can and does work to flatten the epidemic sine curve.
 What we liked
The world didn’t seem so bad after reading this uplifting piece from the BBC about the revival of one of Britain’s great rivers.
And here is some fascinating science about why visualising an action can lead to its better execution.
What we heard
Last week, we asked you what you thought of our coverage of coronavirus. The majority of you were positive, though for balance we include a mix of responses.
Margaret Clough was pleased that we are making huge efforts to ensure that our reporting is balanced and responsible:




All I can say is a huge thankyou for honest, balanced reporting, and really thinking about the effect your ethical reporting can have on our society. I wish more people could have access to it.


Fiona Greig added:




Keep doing what you do best … objective, balanced, trustworthy reporting. It’s what we need most to help us make sense of the world in these turbulent times.


A German reader who didn’t want his name published is not a fan of the minute-by-minute type of coverage:




I have also wondered how you will escalate the coverage as the outbreak grows (which is likely though not certain). If you are already at the top of the scale with the first few cases, the first few deaths in the UK, what will you do should people die in the thousands per day?


And Karen Hubbard in Australia wonders if the media are making things worse:




I think they are scaring everyone with the sensational way of reporting every new person case. They have turned it into a pandemic before it is and ordinary people feel out of control and are panicking. In Australia there is panic buying and now countries are closing there borders, yet so far it has caused less damage than the flu.


Jeremy Becker in Sweden wanted a little more context:




Thanks for your excellent coverage. In terms of perspective, I as a reader would appreciate some statistics comparing mortality rates for corona and other causes of death.


Monica Lanman had a suggestion:




Just one thought that someone might pick up - worldwide collaboration of the kind that is building over Covid 19 is exactly what we need over the climate emergency. Can we learn from the one and inject the same huge power and urgency into the other?


Elsewhere, and changing the subject, Adam Davey wrote in from France, and from leftfield:




Binned wine corks would insulate every home in the country, especially in France. Waste is an absolute scandal. I use all manner of materials to insulate my barn conversion in France. I don’t have a landfill bin bag at all. Zero waste.


Thanks Adam. Corks it is then.
Where was the Upside?
In these charts, which suggest that this too shall pass.



 Photograph: Guardian
Thanks for reading. Keep in touch. Tell us about your experiences in these strangest of days. All the best.


Topics



World news




The Upside weekly report








Share on Facebook






Share on Twitter






Share via Email






Share on LinkedIn






Share on Pinterest






Share on WhatsApp






Share on Messenger








Reuse this content




 