Infected Japanese FA president had no contact with England Women players

The FA has confirmed that no member of the England Women team has exhibited symptoms of Covid-19 on their return from the SheBelieves Cup in the US, following news that the president of the Japanese FA has tested positive with the disease.
The 62-year-old Kozo Tashima, who is also vice-chairman’s of Japan’s Olympic committee and was in Orlando for his country’s opening fixture against Spain, said in a statement released by the JFA: “I have slight fever and pneumonia, but otherwise I’m doing fine.” Tashima was tested for the virus after the Serbian FA president, Slavisa Kokeza, whom he was seated next to at the Uefa general meeting in Amsterdam, was found to have the infection.



Big Sport struggles to pivot to its new position of immense irrelevance | Marina Hyde







Read more





England suffered a 2-0 defeat to the USA following Spain’s 3-1 win over Japan at the Exploria Stadium but the FA has said that none of the team had direct contact with Tashima. “Following news that the president of the Japan Football Association has tested positive for Covid-19, the FA has communicated with all its players and staff who were involved in the tournament,” the FA said.
“We have every confidence that no player or member of the coaching staff was at any time in direct contact with the JFA president during the tournament. He had however been in contact with two FA staff members who are currently asymptomatic and will be following the public health guidance to self-isolate for 14 days.”
US Soccer also said that none of its players or staff have exhibited symptoms following the tournament. “As we gather more information, we do not believe at this time that there was any direct interaction between the president of the Japan Football Association and any player, coach or staff member of the United States Women’s Soccer Team,” it said.
“Presently, no one associated with US Soccer is displaying symptoms and all players are currently at their homes, dispersed throughout the nation. Our medical staff is contacting the players and all involved, and we will continue to assess the situation closely.”
Tashima apologised to those he has come into contact with while unaware he was infected with the disease, saying: “By facing squarely with the disease, I hope to contribute to eliminating prejudice against coronavirus.”
The FA added: “The health and safety of all staff and players under our care is our top priority and our medical team has today contacted all those involved in the recent tournament to offer reassurance and advice.”


Topics



Women's football






England women's football team




Japan women's football team




news






Share on Facebook






Share on Twitter






Share via Email






Share on LinkedIn






Share on Pinterest






Share on WhatsApp






Share on Messenger








Reuse this content




 