Emergency stimulus explained: what the RBA and government are doing to boost Australia's economy

The Reserve Bank of Australia and the Morrison government both announced measures on Thursday to encourage lending to businesses and to boost demand in the Australian economy, flagging due to the shock of the coronavirus.
So what are the emergency stimulus measures – and how will they impact households and businesses?
1. Official interest rate cut to 0.25%
On Wednesday the RBA held a special meeting – out of its usual cycle, and via video-conferencing – to cut the cash rate to 0.25%, a new record low following a cut just two weeks ago.
The RBA governor, Phil Lowe, said the bank expects the official interest rate to remain at this level for three years. Why?



Coronavirus Australia latest: at a glance







Read more





“At its meeting yesterday the board also agreed that we would not increase the cash rate from its current level until progress was made towards full employment and that we were confident that inflation will be sustainably between 2 and 3%,” he said.
“This means that we are likely to be at the current level of interest rates for an extended period of time.”
Lowe reiterated that 0.25% is rock bottom, there is no further to cut. “We’ve done all we can on the cash rate.”
2. Quantitative easing
The RBA has set a target for the yield on 3-year Australian government bonds of around 0.25%. It’s going to buy government bonds in the secondary market to achieve this.
Lowe flagged this in November as a last-resort option if interest rate cuts and fiscal stimulus weren’t enough to boost the economy.
Buying government bonds essentially creates new money, lowering the borrowing cost for the government and freeing up credit elsewhere in the system that can flow through to households and businesses that need loans to survive, or to make long-term investments that can stimulate the economy.



Quantitative easing: what is it and why is the Reserve Bank of Australia considering it?







Read more





Lowe said the RBA is prepared to buy “whatever quantities are needed to achieve this objective” – so there are no limits on this aspect of the program.
3. Cheap credit to banks to lend to businesses
The RBA has set up a three-year funding facility for at least $90bn to be lent to authorised deposit-taking institutions (banks) at a fixed rate of 0.25%.
Banks will be able to obtain initial funding of up to 3% of their existing outstanding credit, with more money on offer if they increase lending to business, especially to small and medium-sized businesses.
The aim is to encourage lending to businesses to spend and invest, keeping workers in jobs.
4. $15bn from the government for business lending
The Morrison government has chipped in “up to $15bn” to enable smaller lenders to continue supporting Australian consumers and small businesses.
While the RBA is looking to lend to authorised deposit-taking institutions, the Australian Office of Financial Management will skew the $15bn to smaller institutions and non-ADI lenders.
The treasurer, Josh Frydenberg, said the measure was designed to “enable customers of smaller lenders to continue to access affordable credit”.
5. Banks to get boost for cash under the mattress
The RBA will also increase the interest it pays on exchange settlement balances – essentially banks’ accounts with the RBA – from 0 to 0.10%.
“This will mitigate the cost to the banking system associated with the large increase in banks’ settlement balances at the Reserve Bank that will occur following these policy actions,” the RBA said.
6. RBA to help banks juggle books
The RBA undertakes one-month and three-month “repo operations” – in which it buys financial assets (mortgages, say) off banks, then sells them back in a few months time, to provide liquidity to Australian financial markets.
The RBA has announced it will continue doing this, and in addition it will now conduct longer-term repo operations of six-month maturity or longer at least weekly, as long as market conditions warrant.


Topics



Coronavirus outbreak






Australian economy




Business




Reserve Bank of Australia




Josh Frydenberg




Scott Morrison




Quantitative easing




explainers






Share on Facebook






Share on Twitter






Share via Email






Share on LinkedIn






Share on Pinterest






Share on WhatsApp






Share on Messenger








Reuse this content




 