Jacinda Ardern holds special coronavirus  press conference for children

New Zealand’s prime minister has held a special press conference just for children, saying the young need extra help understanding the global coronavirus pandemic.
Sitting next to Jacinda Ardern was scientist Dr Michelle Dickinson – who specialises in science communication for kids – and Dr Siouxsie Wiles, who many New Zealanders have come to rely on for calm, practical advice during the crisis.
“Kids ask a lot of questions most of the time, and right now they understandably have plenty about Covid-19,” Ardern posted on Instagram.
“That’s why we put on a press conference just for children and their questions.”
“I hope it will be a useful resource to help answer some of the questions from the young people in your life.”



Ardern has shone in the coronavirus crisis but a recession could still doom her re-election chances







Read more





Schools remain open in New Zealand, although some expert advisors have recommended they close immediately. One school in Dunedin has already closed after a student tested positive for the virus, and 150 of their close contacts are currently in the process of being tested.
New Zealand has 28 cases of Covid-19 and, as of Sunday, overseas travellers have been required to complete 14 days of quarantine, except those arriving from Pacific countries.
Some parents have begun pulling their children out of school as a precaution, and the ministry of education is in the process of ringing every school in the country to discuss preparation plans for teaching students at home.
Earlier this week Dickinson posted avideo online explaining how soap works. Using language that was accessible to kids, the video has become a hit, and she intends to make more of them as the crisis unfolds.

Dr Michelle Dickinson 
(@medickinson)
How does soap destroy #coronavirus #COVID19?It's all thanks to the polar molecules of soap and the double fat coat (or lipid bilayer) that surrounds the virus. #science pic.twitter.com/5Vjd6BoXeK

March 15, 2020

“I’m all about what I can do to use my skills to contribute to helping,” Dickinson said, describing the children’s press conference today as “a total success”.
“The kids just had questions about the virus, how they are transmitted, how to keep their grandparents safe, how does soap work.”
According to the health ministry, children seem to be less severely impacted by the virus than older people, with their symptoms more mild and of shorter duration.
“Try to explain what is happening in a way that is easy [for children] to understand,” the ministry of health advises parents and carers.
“Try to avoid worrying them. Remind them that you are being very safe to protect them and other New Zealanders.”
New Zealand recorded another eight cases of COVID-19 today but the country is still without a recorded case of community transmission, as a ban on indoor gatherings of 100 or more people is introduced. 
While New Zealand boasts one of the least affected populations of any developed country during the global pandemic, the economic bite is still hitting home.
International tourism, which makes up around 2.5 per cent of the country’s GDP, is grinding to a halt as the flow of visitors dries up.
New Zealand Foreign Minister Winston Peters has also followed Australia in elevating all the country’s travel advisories to level four, or “Do Not Travel”.
“This is the first time the New Zealand Government has advised New Zealanders against travelling anywhere overseas. That reflects the seriousness of the situation we are facing with COVID-19,” Peters said.


Topics



Coronavirus outbreak






New Zealand




Jacinda Ardern




Infectious diseases




Asia Pacific




news






Share on Facebook






Share on Twitter






Share via Email






Share on LinkedIn






Share on Pinterest






Share on WhatsApp






Share on Messenger








Reuse this content




 