Self-isolation: the volunteers offering help and hope

“Self isolating? You are not alone!” declared the leaflets that Rosanna Cardona and Kiara Mitchinson stuffed into letterboxes along Caledonian Road in north London on Tuesday.
Wearing latex gloves, Cardona, a solicitor and mother of two, and Mitchinson, a banker taking time off to volunteer, dived in and out of hairdressers, grocery shops and up the staircases of the council blocksnear Pentonville Prison bringing a message of hope to people with jangled nerves.
Quick guide What to do if you have coronavirus symptoms in the UK  
 Show 
 Hide  

Symptoms are defined as either:
a high temperature - you feel hot to touch on your chest or back
a new continuous cough - this means you've started coughing repeatedly
NHS advice is that anyone with symptoms should stay at home for at least 7 days.
If you live with other people, they should stay at home for at least 14 days, to avoid spreading the infection outside the home.
After 14 days, anyone you live with who does not have symptoms can return to their normal routine. But, if anyone in your home gets symptoms, they should stay at home for 7 days from the day their symptoms start. Even if it means they're at home for longer than 14 days.
Information: If you live with someone who is 70 or over, has a long-term condition, is pregnant or has a weakened immune system, try to find somewhere else for them to stay for 14 days.
If you have to stay at home together, try to keep away from each other as much as possible.
After 7 days, if you no longer have a high temperature you can return to your normal routine.
If you still have a high temperature, stay at home until your temperature returns to normal.
If you still have a cough after 7 days, but your temperature is normal, you do not need to continue staying at home. A cough can last for several weeks after the infection has gone.
Source: NHS England on 18 March 2020




Was this helpful?







Thank you for your feedback.

“Give us a call,” Cardona told 85-year-old Ellen Lawler, who was having a trim at Harmony Hair Studio and welcomed the offer. “We’re a new group, it’s all free and we can help you out.”
“I am on my own,” Lawler said. “I just got out of hospital.”
She said she would be living in isolation and had been struggling to get tins of corned beef and luncheon meat, or flour to make soda bread.
In Caledonian Estate the pair called up to residents’ balconies, asking to be buzzed into staircases.
Scott Thompson, 65, a recently widowed maths tutor was intrigued. “I was wondering when some information was coming,” he said, adding he would think about volunteering. After three months of grief, he said, “the last thing I need is to isolate”.
Q&A How can I protect myself and others from the coronavirus outbreak?  
 Show 
 Hide  
The World Health Organization is recommending that people take simple precautions to reduce exposure to and transmission of the coronavirus, for which there is no specific cure or vaccine.
The UN agency advises people to:
Frequently wash their hands with an alcohol-based hand rub or warm water and soap
Cover their mouth and nose with a flexed elbow or tissue when sneezing or coughing
Avoid close contact with anyone who has a fever or cough
Seek early medical help if they have a fever, cough and difficulty breathing, and share their travel history with healthcare providers
Many countries are now enforcing or recommending curfews or lockdowns. 
In the UK, NHS advice is that anyone with symptoms should stay at home for at least 7 days.
If you live with other people, they should stay at home for at least 14 days, to avoid spreading the infection outside the home.



Was this helpful?







Thank you for your feedback.

With the posters offering help on lampposts and in shops, the Caledonian Road and Barnsbury Mutual Aid Group, has started running errands.
On Monday, Mitchinson dropped off a prescription inhaler on a doorstep where Dorothy, an elderly resident with a chronic respiratory condition, had left her a small bag of coins to pay for the medicine and a thank you card.
“She wrote that it was such a frightening time,” Mitchinson said. “I understand that. She is inside watching the news and will be for months. She texted me later saying she couldn’t express her gratitude enough.”
Cardona and Mitchinson are members of one of more than 1,200 Covid-19 mutual aid groups established in streets, neighbourhoods and towns in a flowering of volunteer spirit across the UK in the past few days.
More than 400 such groups were formed in the hours after Boris Johnson announced on Monday evening that people aged over 70 must self-isolate. They pair volunteers with people who need shopping and prescriptions picking up, or even just some moral support.
The newest to form are in Blyth, Caerphilly and Stirling and the level of help required could be considerable. There are about 8 million people aged over 70, accounting for 12% of the population. While many have friends and family to help, plenty, like Lawler, do not.
Cardona, whose cancer-patient father lives in Gloucestershire, feels she should help the elderly in her area, as she hoped others might do for her loved ones 100 miles away.
As she delivered leaflets, a Gloucester group was registering with the umbrella organisation, Covid-19 Mutual Aid. “It’s just nice to act,” she said.
Others, including Mitchinson, have seen the seriousness of the illness already: a 27-year-old colleague was this week discharged from intensive care after a weeks-long battle with the virus.
Families who are self-isolating will need help too. On Tuesday, the Child Poverty Action Group led calls for the government to ease difficulties by adding £10 to child benefit payments and making universal credit advance payments no longer repayable.
“It’s a really odd situation,” said Anne Kasami, 43, at home looking after Anya, three, and Ryan, five. “We really don’t know what to do. I would hope people will help each other.”


 
 

 
 Facebook 
 
 Twitter 
 
 Pinterest 


 Anne Kasami with Anya, three, and Ryan, five. Photograph: Jill Mead/The Guardian
There have been warnings from some council leaders that mutual aid groups might spread infection by going door to door and that in allocating members of the public to deliver food there are safeguarding risks. Mitchinson gave that short shrift.
“There are definitely safeguarding issues around people in flats with no food,” she said. The volunteers spoke to one old lady who said she had called the council and asked for help with shopping, but was told that was not available. Islington council has been contacted for comment.

As they leafleted, Mitchinson and Cardona found a neighbourhood bewildered by Britain’s new status on the coronavirus frontline. Cafe owners were considering the slump in business after the government advised against visiting pubs, restaurants, theatres, bars and clubs.
Business was down 50% in the Breakout cafe opposite the prison and Starbucks was empty. Students in face masks at the UCL hall of residence hurried in with shopping.
But Simon Smedley, a 55-year-old builder, sipping tea and reading the Sun in the Breakout, reflected another view: “I am not bothered. It’s blown out of proportion.”
As they walked, many offered help. “I have 90- and 95-year-old customers but they have stopped coming in the last few days,” said Huseyin Guler, owner of the U See Inn Continental grocery store.
“I can make packages ready. If people can’t pay, I can see what I can do. Some people will need it.”


Topics



Coronavirus outbreak






London




Voluntary sector




news






Share on Facebook






Share on Twitter






Share via Email






Share on LinkedIn






Share on Pinterest






Share on WhatsApp






Share on Messenger








Reuse this content




 