Trains scale back manual ticket checks amid coronavirus outbreak

Manual checks of tickets on trains are being scaled back by UK rail operators as a result of the coronavirus outbreak, to protect staff and customers from possible contamination.
The relaxation is made easier as a result of fewer passengers, with the numbers using the trains in freefall as a result of new government advice on Tuesday for people to avoid all “non-essential” travel and work from home where possible.
But while operators say they are committed to maintaining services, buffet and on-board catering services are being axed as a result of dwindling demand.
Abellio Greater Anglia – which operates commuter and longer-distance routes out of London to Essex, Suffolk, Norfolk and Cambridgeshire – introduced the changes on Tuesday morning.



Tell us: have you been affected by the coronavirus?







Read more





A Greater Anglia spokesperson said: “We have asked conductors to be primarily based in cabs and only carry out essential duties. Customers still require a valid ticket for their journey and we continue to undertake ticket checks. 
“To help protect customers and staff, consistent with government advice to maintain ‘social distancing’, we have withdrawn on-board catering on our inter-city services until further notice.”
LNER, which operates the InterCity East Coast franchise providing long-distance inter-city services from London King’s Cross to north east England and Scotland, is giving its train managers the option not to handle tickets when carrying out checks.
An LNER spokesperson said: “As a responsible business we are providing regular updates to our people with information and advice from Public Health England. We recognise some of our people currently prefer to avoid handling tickets when carrying out checks. For this reason, we have given our train managers some discretion on how they complete onboard ticket checks..”
Increasingly popular digital and e-tickets require scanning, with no physical contact necessary. However, thousands of paper tickets are still issued across the network every day which may be stamped or punched by the train manager.
The rail industry is in talks with the government over a range of steps to protect franchises against falling passenger numbers due to the coronavirus outbreak. Even before the government’s advice on Monday afternoon, a recent meeting of industry figures revealed that numbers had fallen by up to 18% on certain lines.
A spokesman for the Rail Delivery Group, which represents operators, said: “These are unprecedented times that are clearly having a huge impact on every sector and we are seeing a drastic decline in passenger numbers. Clearly, rail is a vital service, moving fuel to power stations that keep the lights on, food to supermarkets so shelves stay stocked and key workers to places like hospitals and police stations.”
Transport for London said it is in the final testing stages of a new, longer-lasting cleaning agent that would provide anti-viral protection on hard surfaces in tubes and buses for up to 30 days. It hopes to begin using it across the network in the next couple of weeks.
London mayor Sadiq Kahn said today that TfL will start running a reduced service on tubes and buses over the next few days. Weekday public transport in the capital will be cut back to a “Saturday-type service”, Khan said. This means weekday tube and bus services will run at the same reduced capacity as they would on a weekend, and could be reduced further after that.


Topics



Rail transport






Transport




Rail industry




Coronavirus outbreak






Share on Facebook






Share on Twitter






Share via Email






Share on LinkedIn






Share on Pinterest






Share on WhatsApp






Share on Messenger








Reuse this content




 