Australians with disabilities missing out on essential services as Covid-19 crisis escalates

People with disabilities have had their national disability insurance scheme and other support services cancelled and been unable to get essential medication and supplies during the coronavirus outbreak, according to a survey by peak bodies in the sector.
A survey of 200 families conducted by Children and Young People with Disability Australia and the Australian Coalition for Inclusive Education also reveals concern about a lack of clear official advice for people with disabilities during the crisis.
Of the families with children and young people with disabilities surveyed, 82% of had not been able to buy essential supplies, 34% had NDIS or other support services cancelled and 15% were unable to buy the medication they needed.
An overwhelming majority (86%) said they were not receiving the information they needed to “keep children or young people with disability safe during the crisis”.
Mary Sayers, the chief executive of Children and Young People with Disability Australia, told Guardian Australia the government’s urgent priority should be ensuring an adequate supply of essential medicines and other supplies for children with disabilities, as well as personal protective equipment for carers.
She said disability service organisations were facing “enormous trouble with workers not turning up” and that parents and children were having support services cancelled at short notice.
One parent had told the survey their six-year-old child had lost 3kg during the crisis after a hospital appointment was cancelled.



Why Australia is not shutting schools to help control the spread of coronavirus







Read more





Respondents to the survey said they were frustrated by mixed messages from education systems across the country about how social distancing would affect student support services.
Parents of children with disabilities were unsure whether to send their kids to school, where they may continue to share drinking taps and play closely with other children, she said.
Sue Tape’s daughter Eliza has Rubinstein-Taybi syndrome, a physical and intellectual disability that also means “respiratory bugs can really knock her about”.
Tape said there had been a “distinct lack” of clear information and advice.
“We’ve decided to self-isolate both our kids at home this week as a pre-emptive measure because there haven’t been some hard decisions made by other people,” she said.
“I can’t see any planning beyond the decisions we are personally making. By rights, both my kids could still be at school, I could still be getting on public transport and going to work.”
Quick guide Coronavirus: self-isolation advice for Australians  
 Show 
 Hide  


Who needs to isolate?

The Australian government announced new travel restrictions to try to slow the spread of coronavirus on 15 March. From midnight, all returning Australians and overseas visitors are required to isolate themselves for 14 days after arriving in the country.
People who have been in close contact with somebody diagnosed coronavirus are already required to self-isolate.



What does self-isolation mean?

Self-isolation starts when you arrive in Australia, with the federal department of health recommending you use personal transport, such as a car, to travel home or to your hotel from the airport, to minimise exposure to others.
 “If you need to use public transport (e.g. taxis, ride-hail services, trains, buses and trams), follow the precautions outlined in the public transport guide. 
 “During the 14 days of isolation, you must stay at home or in your hotel and don’t go to public places including work, school, childcare, university or public gatherings. Only people who usually live with you should be in the home. Do not see visitors.”
 “Ask others who are not in isolation to get food and necessities for you. If you must leave home, such as to seek medical care, wear a surgical mask. If you don’t have a mask, take care to not cough or sneeze on others.”
 “If you live in a private house, it is safe for you to go into your garden or courtyard. If you live in an apartment or are staying in a hotel, it is also safe for you to go into the garden but you should wear a surgical mask to minimise risk to others and move quickly through any common areas.”



What if I feel sick?

The health department recommends monitoring yourself for symptoms including “fever, cough or shortness of breath. Other early symptoms include chills, body aches, sore throat, runny nose and muscle pain.”
 “If you develop symptoms (fever, a cough, sore throat, tiredness or shortness of breath) within 14 days of returning to Australia or within 14 days of last contact of a confirmed case, you should arrange to see your doctor for urgent assessment. You should telephone the health clinic or hospital before you arrive and tell them your travel history or that you may have been in contact with a potential case of coronavirus.”



Limiting the spread at home

The health department recommends practising good hand and sneeze/cough hygiene as the best defence against most viruses.
 It also advises regular cleaning of household surfaces.
 “To minimise the spread of any germs you should regularly wash surfaces that are frequently touched such as door handles, light switches, kitchen and bathroom areas. Clean with household detergent or disinfectant.
Source: Australian Department of Health 




Was this helpful?







Thank you for your feedback.

“In the absence of information, we have to make these decisions. That is very stressful. And there are other families that don’t get to make that decision because they have to go to work.”
The NDIS minister, Stuart Robert, said the government had plans in place to support NDIS participants, providers and the NDIA and “to ensure continuation of services in the case of an escalation in the incidence of Covid-19”.
“NDIS participants, families, carers and providers will be given clear direction if services are disrupted in any way, ensuring they have options to continue accessing supports,” he said.
Robert said he would meet NDIS stakeholders over the coming days “in preparation of escalation of incidence of Covid-19”.
“I am working closely with my cabinet colleagues, departments and agencies to support a coordinated approach to delivering essential services such as the NDIS to the community.”
A group of disability researchers from the universities of Melbourne, Sydney and New South Wales on Friday released a series of recommendations for the government to develop a specific response for people with disabilities during the coronavirus outbreak.
It included a call to rapidly increase the healthcare sector’s capacity to care for people with disabilities and the disability care workforce so services would remain open for those who need them.
The Disability Reform Council, which oversees the NDIS, will meet on Wednesday.


Topics



Coronavirus outbreak






National disability insurance scheme




Welfare




Health




news






Share on Facebook






Share on Twitter






Share via Email






Share on LinkedIn






Share on Pinterest






Share on WhatsApp






Share on Messenger








Reuse this content




 