Thousands held on cruise ship off US west coast as scientists say: ‘This is now a pandemic’

Concern was mounting yesterday for thousands of passengers – many elderly – on a cruise ship being held off San Francisco, after 21 people on board tested positive for coronavirus.
US vice-president Mike Pence urged older Americans to “use caution” in planning cruise holidays in the near future, as he announced plans to bring the Grand Princess into a “non-commercial port” where all passengers and crew would be tested. Individuals would be quarantined and treated as needed. There are more than 3,500 people, including 140 Britons, on the ship. Two of those who tested positive were passengers, while the other 19 were crew members.
Pence’s low-key remarks contrasted starkly with the views of President Trump who has said he would prefer that cruise-ship passengers exposed to the virus be left on board so they don’t add to the number of total infections in the US. “I like the numbers being where they are,” he said. “I don’t need to have the numbers double because of one ship that wasn’t our fault.”
On board the Grand Princess, Jackie Bissell, from Dartford in Kent, said passengers had been given little information on what will happen next. “We are waiting for the ship’s captain, but I think he’s as much in the dark as we are and he has said he’s only giving us information as and when he gets it,” she told BBC Radio 4’s Today programme.
The news of the plight of the passengers on the Grand Princess – sister ship of the Diamond Princess, the cruise liner which suffered its own deadly coronavirus outbreak while moored off Japan – came as fears grew for more than 150 people on another cruise ship, in quarantine in the southern Egyptian city of Luxor. Last night authorities said a further 33 people had tested positive for the virus, on top of 12 already confirmed.
The total number of cases of infections around the world has topped six figures and on Saturday stood at 105,479. The global death toll has reached 3,555. The World Health Organization (WHO) called the spread of the virus “deeply concerning”, but continues to resist describing the outbreak as a pandemic, to the fury of senior scientists.
Researchers say the virus that was first identified in China is now spreading freely in four regions, has reached every continent but Antarctica, and its advance seems unavoidable. “I think it’s pretty clear we’re in a pandemic and I don’t know why WHO is resisting that,” said Michael Osterholm, director of the Centre for Infectious Disease Research and Policy at Minnesota University. Devi Sridhar, a professor of global public health at Edinburgh University, agreed. This outbreak meets all the definitions for a pandemic, she said.
In China, around 70 people were trapped on Saturday after a five-storey hotel being used for coronavirus quarantine collapsed in the port city of Quanzhou. A total of 34 people have so far been rescued as workers in orange overalls clamber over mounds of rubble in search of other survivors. It is believed people were using the hotel as a quarantine centre as prescribed by local regulations after they had returned from Hubei province, the centre of the coronavirus outbreak.
In Spain, police reported they were preparing to lock down entire blocks of flats after dozens of coronavirus cases were traced to a funeral held in the Basque country two weeks ago. Spain has so far confirmed 430 cases of the virus – 60 of which originated among people who attended the funeral service in the Basque city of Vitoria-Gasteiz with most concentrated in the nearby towns of Haro and Casalarreina.
Local authorities said police would be “reinforcing home isolation controls” in Haro and limiting access to the town’s health centre. “We need to take exceptional measures designed to stop the transmission of the illness,” said the regional health minister, Sara Alba. The death toll from the virus in Spain currently stands at 10.
In France, seven more people have died, bringing its toll to 16. France now has 716 confirmed cases, a jump of 103 from Friday, while in Italy Nicola Zingaretti, leader of Italy’s co-ruling Democratic party, revealed he had tested positive. With 4,636 registered cases, Italy lies behind only China, South Korea and Iran in terms of numbers of infected people.
In addition, on Saturday Pope Francis cancelled his main public appearances to avoid crowds in St Peter’s Square. The pontiff, 83, also cancelled a Lent retreat for the first time in his papacy, though the Vatican stressed he was suffering only from a cold that was unrelated “to other pathologies”.I n Palestine, 15 Americans suspected of being exposed to coronavirus during a trip to the Holy Land are now in quarantine near Bethlehem and are coordinating with US and Palestinian authorities to try to get home. “It was going to be the trip of a lifetime,” Chris Bell, 42, lead pastor of the 3Circle Church in Fairhope, Alabama, told Reuters from the Angel Hotel, in Beit Jala, which is next to Bethlehem.
The Angel Hotel was the first area of coronavirus concern in the Bethlehem area. After several of its workers tested positive this week, the Palestinian Authority put restrictions on foreign tourist travel and later declared a 30-day state of emergency. The measures have effectively shut down the city. Elsewhere in the West Bank, Palestinian security forces staffed checkpoints and turned foreigners away, while schools, colleges, kindergartens and national parks were ordered to remain closed.


Topics



Coronavirus outbreak




The Observer






Spain




China






Share on Facebook






Share on Twitter






Share via Email






Share on LinkedIn






Share on Pinterest






Share on WhatsApp






Share on Messenger








Reuse this content




 