What effect will winter have on coronavirus in Australia?

In many parts of the world, wintertime tends to be when people get sick from viruses that cause colds and influenza.
The illness Covid-19 broke out in China’s winter and spread in Iran, Italy and the rest of Europe as those countries endured their coldest months.
As Australia heads into winter, what could this mean for the spread of Sars-CoV-2 – the virus that causes the Covid-19 illness?



The big question over coronavirus – can a person get it twice?







Read more





Experts have told Guardian Australia that cooler temperatures can affect the behaviour and spread of a virus in three interconnected ways.
Firstly, temperatures can affect the virus directly.
Some viruses may have a temperature range where they can survive for longer and this is partly dependent on their “envelope” – the outer layer that’s made of lipids (which is why washing hands with soap is effective, because it disrupts the lipids).
Secondly, when temperatures drop, this changes the behaviour of the human population. People tend to spend more time indoors and in closer contact, making it easier for the virus to spread.
Thirdly, we already know that like in other parts of the world, winter in Australia is when other viruses circulate and this can affect the immunity of populations.
Associate Prof Tom Kotsimbos of Monash University, who is also a respiratory physician at the Alfred hospital in Melbourne, says seasonality can cause an increase in the spread of viruses.
“That is well established, but whether we understand that deeply is another thing. It does have an influence, but we don’t understand it specifically. This is a new virus, and that does not mean it will be like the others.
“We know it’s about the biology of the virus, the general and specific immunity of us and the environmental and behavioural conditions,” he says.
But there is much less certainty, he says, about how important each factor is when it comes if a person gets sick.
“It’s interesting that [Covid-19] has spread all over the world quite quickly – both north and south,” he said, adding that this suggested either the new virus was not dependent on temperature or that this dependency was not as important as the lack of immunity in the population that was helping it to spread.
Does the coronavirus have a preferred temperature?
Some studies that have not yet been peer-reviewed have tried to find out if there is a clear link between temperature and the rate of infection of the coronavirus, but have been inconclusive or contradictory.
Dr Meru Sheel of the National Centre for Epidemiology and Population Health at Australian National University, says: “There is no clear evidence to suggest a relationship between outdoor temperatures and spread of coronaviruses.



Being tested for coronavirus I saw people who were refused get angry. But don’t panic | Anonymous







Read more





“We don’t know enough about Sars-CoV-2 yet to know how change in weather will affect outbreak and the disease epidemiology.
“In some tropical countries such as Pacific Island countries, despite the warm weather, there is some seasonal influenza activity and it is related to increase in travellers from countries such as Australia and New Zealand and to a much lesser extent related to change in weather.”
What about how the virus behaves on surfaces?
Sheel said studies are under way investigating the duration of the survival of Sars-CoV-2 under different conditions and on different surfaces.
“Evidence from these studies is likely to improve our understanding of the disease transmission pathways and improve our response strategy.
“However until we know more, we need to ensure that all surfaces are decontaminated using disinfectants such as ethanol, hydrogen peroxide, bleach etc – based on local infection, prevention and control guidelines.”
Sheel pointed to a review of research into other known human coronaviruses, including Sars and Mers, that found the viruses survived for varying lengths of time.
The study found they could be infectious on inanimate surfaces such as plastic, metal, wood and paper for up to nine days, but disinfectant cleaning was effective.
Do viruses do well in winter because we all head indoors?
Sheel says rather than the temperature itself, the change in the way Covid-19 spreads “is likely influenced by frequency at which people interact during cooler versus warmer weather”.
Dr Chris Burrell, emeritus professor of virology of the University of Adelaide, said there were other known coronaviruses that had been around for half a century and these were also prevalent in winter.
“But that’s because of people congregating together,” he said.
He said one example of this effect was with respiratory syncytial virus (RSV) that causes a common respiratory disease in young children that tends to arrive in winter.
Burrell says: “If you think of children in preschool, in the summer they’re out in the sun and don’t have a lot of personal contact with each other. In winter, they’re inside and breathing the same air.
“I think that any effect of temperature on coronavirus won’t be nearly as important as the effect of limiting its spread by isolating people.”
What about Covid-19 spreading during flu season?
Ten years ago Tom Kotsimbos led a taskforce of respiratory specialists that looked at what impact a potential early winter arrival of swine flu could have on Australia’s population.
He said the same questions that were being asked then – about the influence of temperature and the overlap with Australia’s flu season – are being asked again now.
“Clearly this is a different virus – but we have been here before ... but we don’t know how Covid-19 will behave.
“On an individual level, if you get a virus when your defences are already down from a recent viral infection, then that could be increasingly challenging with the progression of the disease.
“Previous studies have suggested that if you have recently recovered from a viral infection then your innate immune systems may actually be bolstered and that might help with subsequent attacks.”
He said adding the impacts of Covid-19 on top of flu season “will put an incredible stress on the healthcare system”.



Coronavirus: what is social distancing and how can it save lives?







Read more





Dr Kirsty Short, a virologist at the University of Queensland, said: “My concern is that [in winter] people tend to be in closer contact and it coincides with our flu season.
“My main concern is that when you think of the healthcare system, that does get pushed in a bad flu season. If we combine a moderate flu season with a moderate coronavirus season, that could be problematic.”
Sheel said: “As Australia moves into cooler weather, we are likely to see an increase in respiratory diseases such as common colds, influenza and RSV infections.
“To minimise the pressure on the health system it will be important for the community to adopt public health prevention measures, get vaccinated and staying at home when unwell – practising social distancing.
“This will also help improve our ability to test for Covid-19 and in return protect our vulnerable populations such as the elderly and those with underlying conditions and minimise their risk of exposure to infection with Covid-19. All these factors will contribute towards better control of the outbreak.”


Topics



Coronavirus outbreak






Health




Infectious diseases




explainers






Share on Facebook






Share on Twitter






Share via Email






Share on LinkedIn






Share on Pinterest






Share on WhatsApp






Share on Messenger








Reuse this content




 