Wales v Scotland Six Nations match called off 24 hours before kick-off

The Welsh Rugby Union called off Saturday’s Six Nations match against Scotland 24 hours before the kick-off to fall in line with other sports in the country which had cancelled events because of coronavirus.
The WRU issued a statement on Friday morning saying that, after taking medical advice, the match would go ahead. Almost immediately the Premier League and the Football League announced they were suspending fixtures until 3 April, along with the women’s Super League and Championship, England’s Test series in Sri Lanka was called off and in golf the Masters was postponed.
The Welsh government said on Thursday, after taking part in the Cobra meeting to discuss what action to take to contain the virus, that there was no medical reason to call off the match between Wales and Scotland. The following morning the WRU said the game would go ahead as planned.



Sky's the limit for Scotland's Jamie Ritchie despite recent blow







Read more





“Throughout, the WRU board have followed the scientific advice of government, Public Health Wales and medical experts,” it said in a statement, “and determined that the game would be held or postponed based on that advice.”
Less than five hours later a new statement was issued saying the match had been postponed. The reason for the about-turn was that, while the medical advice remained the same, “we have decided that it is in the best interest of supporters, players and staff to fall into line with recent measures taken across the UK and global sports industries.”
The WRU found itself in self-isolation and, ultimately, it acted on the prompting of the Welsh government, which had come under criticism on social media for sanctioning a game that would attract some 75,000 spectators and generate packed trains into Cardiff and crowded bars in the city as well as the queues to get into the ground.
“Every effort has been made to stage this game and we appreciate that individuals will have been inconvenienced,” said the WRU. “Given the fluid and unprecedented nature of this issue, a postponement became the only viable option. We took advice from other stakeholders, including the Six Nations, on this fast-moving issue.” The Under-20s match between Wales and Scotland was played in Colwyn Bay on Friday night behind closed doors.
The postponement meant none of the final round’s matches would take place, with England’s trip to Rome called off last week and the Paris showdown between France and Ireland following at the start of this week. No alternative dates have been agreed with October looking the most likely month: Ireland’s home match with Italy also has to be rearranged.
Like Italy, Wales and Scotland will be looking for agreement with Premiership clubs over the release of players. October is not a month that falls within the international window, meaning clubs are not obliged to make their players available. That would cost Wales Nick Tompkins, Dan Biggar, WillGriff John and Taulupe Faletau while Scotland would be without their captain, Stuart Hogg, who sent a Twitter message to Scotland supporters after the postponement saying “thank you very much and take care,” Chris Harris, Sam Skinner, Allan Dell and Duncan Weir.
The French Rugby Federation has put the Top 14 on hold, along with the second-tier Pro D2, because of the pandemic while all rugby in Scotland will be suspended for two weeks from Sunday but has since . “Health is the absolute priority,” said Paul Goze, president of the Ligue National de Rugby. “It is essential to stay together in this period of national solidarity.”
The Scottish Rugby Union said: “We have taken on board all expert medical advice before now and we are taking a precautionary approach to give time to assess what the impact of coronavirus will be on Scottish society in the coming weeks before deciding on the next steps.”
The Premiership Cup final between Sale and Harlequins was set to go ahead at the AJ Bell Stadium tomorrow but has since been postponed. The game was called off yesterday evening after one of Quins’ support staff showed “flu-like symptoms” and subsequently went into isolation. “We’re incredibly sorry to all the people who will be disappointed,” a Premiership Rugby statement said. “However, the welfare of fans, players and staff remains our first concern.”
Saturday’s Championship match between Nottingham and Jersey Reds was called off after two of the visiting players went into self-isolation and World Rugby postponed its women’s rugby sevens series tournament due to be held in South Africa for two days from 28 March.
On Thursday the Guinness Pro14, which involves teams from five countries, was suspended indefinitely because of the pandemic which has prompted widespread travel restrictions in Italy.


Topics



Wales rugby union team






Scotland rugby union team




Six Nations 2020




Rugby union




Six Nations






Share on Facebook






Share on Twitter






Share via Email






Share on LinkedIn






Share on Pinterest






Share on WhatsApp






Share on Messenger








Reuse this content




 