Trump announces US-Canada border closed to 'non-essential traffic'

Donald Trump has announced the US will close its border with Canada to “non-essential traffic” in an attempt to curb what he again called the “Chinese virus”, prompting further allegations of racism.
In a string of tweets about the coronavirus outbreak on Wednesday, Trump wrote: “We will be, by mutual consent, temporarily closing our Northern Border with Canada to non-essential traffic. Trade will not be affected. Details to follow!”
At the White House coronavirus taskforce briefing, he added: “You can only be vigilant and very professional, but it’s not pertaining at this moment to trade between the two countries.”
In another of a series of measures on Wednesday, the US Senate overwhelmingly passed legislation providing billions of dollars to limit the damage from the coronavirus pandemic through free testing, paid sick leave and expanded safety-net spending.
The bill, which was backed by Trump, now goes to him to be signed into law. Congress and the White House are discussing additional stimulus measures that could cost more than $1tn.
Earlier in the day the president also said he would invoke the Defense Production Act, aimed at getting the private sector to produce more emergency supplies. But he later appeared to walk that back, saying he’d only signed an executive order signaling he’d invoke the DPA “should we need to invoke it in a worse case scenario in the future.”
Closing the border with Canada raised fresh questions over America’s southern border with Mexico but was welcomed by Canada, as health officials grapple with a surge in coronavirus cases originating in US.
Canada’s prime minister, Justin Trudeau, said: “We’re encouraging people to stay home. We’re telling our citizens not to visit their neighbours if they don’t absolutely have to. This collaborative and reciprocal measure is an extension of that prudent approach. I want to be clear though, that essential travel will continue.”
Trudeau was speaking outside his home in Ottawa. For nearly a week, he has been in self-quarantine after his wife, Sophie Grégoire Trudeau, tested positive for Covid-19.



Steven Mnuchin warns coronavirus could bring 20% unemployment







Read more





The longest undefended land border in the world, spanning more than 5,000 miles, represents a critical lifeline for both countries, with billions in goods passing through each day. The last time the border closed was in the days after the 11 September 2001 terrorist attacks on New York and Washington.
Trudeau added: “Our governments recognise that it is critical that we preserve supply chains between both countries. These supply chains ensure that food, fuel and life-saving medicines reach people on both sides of the border.”
Trump’s decision to work with Trudeau contrasted with his earlier move to ban most travel from Europe, which was abruptly announced in a televised Oval Office address and blindsided many officials.
Christopher Sands, director of the Canada Institute at the Wilson Center think tank in Washington, said: “The most significant aspect of the decision to restrict crossings at the US-Canadian border is that it was mutual, with both Washington and Ottawa taking coordinated action that allows for essential shipments and individuals to cross.”
The total number of known US infections has surged past 7,000, with cases reported in all 50 states. Trump has struck a more sombre and serious tone in recent days and, on Wednesday, referred to himself as a “wartime president”.
He told reporters: “To this day, nobody’s seen anything like what they were able to do during World War II. And now it’s our time. We must sacrifice together, because we are all in this together, and we’ll come through together.”
He announced the deployment of two big hospital ships to New York and the west coast to reinforce medical services, and urged young people to make “sacrifices” for the greater good. He also announced the Department of Housing and Urban Development would suspend all foreclosures and evictions until the end of April. Mike Pence, the vice-president, urged hospitals to delay elective procedures.
But Trump raised eyebrows when he was asked about professional sportspeople without symptoms reportedly getting tests while others are waiting in line and cannot get them. A reporter asked: “Do the well-connected go to the front of the line? Should that happen?” Trump replied: “No, I wouldn’t say so ... but perhaps that’s been the story of life.”
The administration plans to use a health-focused statute to crack down further in swiftly removing migrants or asylum seekers who cross the US-Mexico border unlawfully.
Trump said the move could happen as soon as Wednesday, but that his administration did not plan to fully close the border with Mexico.
Critics have accused Trump of initially playing down the threat and providing misleading information on issues such as the availability of testing. His claim on Tuesday that “I felt it was a pandemic long before it was called a pandemic,” was met with widespread derision.
On Wednesday the president used Twitter to defend his handling of the crisis and lashing out at media coverage. He posted: “I always treated the Chinese Virus very seriously, and have done a very good job from the beginning, including my very early decision to close the ‘borders’ from China – against the wishes of almost all. Many lives were saved. The Fake News new narrative is disgraceful & false!”
But his brazen repetition of the phrase “Chinese virus” in this and other tweets sparked fresh condemnation. The World Health Organization has advised against such terminology, warning that it could be “stigmatising”. There are fears it will fuel discrimination against Asian Americans.
Asked on why he keeps using the phrase, Trump replied: “Because it comes from China. It’s not racist at all, no, not at all. It comes from China, that’s why, I want to be accurate…
“I have great love for all of the people from our country but, as you know, China tried to say at one point – maybe they stopped now – that it was caused by American soldiers. That can’t happen. It’s not going to happen, not as long as I’m president. It comes from China.”
But Hillary Clinton, the former secretary of state defeated by Trump in the 2016 election, tweeted: “The president is turning to racist rhetoric to distract from his failures to take the coronavirus seriously early on, make tests widely available, and adequately prepare the country for a period of crisis.”
She added: “Don’t fall for it. Don’t let your friends and family fall for it.”
Reuters contributed to this report


Topics



Coronavirus outbreak






Donald Trump




Canada




Justin Trudeau




Hillary Clinton




Americas




news






Share on Facebook






Share on Twitter






Share via Email






Share on LinkedIn






Share on Pinterest






Share on WhatsApp






Share on Messenger








Reuse this content




 