On a roll: is Britain ready for reusable toilet paper?

Mostly, these are the worst of times, but for loo roll purveyors and disruptors it will never be better. Sales are up and supermarket shelves are empty as more and more shoppers stockpile. So we should not be surprised by the rise of reusable toilet roll – squares of washable textiles that are linked together with plastic poppers and sold on sites such as Etsy.
If you are, like me, invested in a sustainable lifestyle, the idea is quite thrilling. Reusable represents the gold standard of eco-engineering. Everything that is made and used has an eco footprint, which includes the energy used to create the thing in the first place. Single-use products are the worst, recycled a close second.
Historically, squeamishness has put some products out of the reach of reusable design, but this is changing. The product designer Isabel Aagaard of LastObject claims to have sold more than 125,000 units of a reusable cotton bud (since March last year). The same company recently brought out a reusable tissue, which people my age still call a handkerchief. Then there are mooncups instead of tampons and, of course, a long tradition in reusable nappies.
But are we ready for washable loo roll? The farcical supply chain of toilet roll is certainly ready for disruption: dead-tree paper (or sawdust) is carted across the world, wrapped in plastic and lined up for sale. Even the most ethical versions such as Who Gives a Crap have to be transported (by ship) and delivered to homes in vans. All paper-making is water-intensive, too.
The reusable fabric roll kicks all this into touch. Bidets and flannels have previously been touted as the most eco route, but the lifecycle analysis (the process of adding up all the energy costs) of using and washing them is contentious. One Defra study from 2008 put the dampener on eco nappies, saying they used more energy than disposable ones because parents would typically tumble-dry them. The same may well be true for reusable loo roll – even if many devotees only use them for number ones. They will undoubtedly need to be washed at a high temperature – which takes a great a deal of energy. Questions also need to be asked about whether detergents need to be used and do the textiles shed microplastics when washed?
Habit and tradition will ultimately decide whether reusable loo roll catches on. The earliest advert I can find on a perforated roll of paper in the UK is in the Lichfield Mercury from 1885. One Frederic Brown (really) guarantees “satisfaction” through the promise of a neat contrivance to replace the standard packet of paper. He cleverly sold a 100-sheet perforated roll with a handsome holder (cost: 2 shillings).
What he understood was that if you want to change a habit, you need to sell a whole system. Today’s disruptors shouldn’t just be selling the squares of textile, but also the hamper that can be closed and easily carried to the washing machine. For mass uptake, they probably need to think bigger than the square.


Topics



Recycling




Shortcuts






Ethical and green living




Waste




features






Share on Facebook






Share on Twitter






Share via Email






Share on LinkedIn






Share on Pinterest






Share on WhatsApp






Share on Messenger








Reuse this content




 