Kevin Durant among four Brooklyn Nets players to test positive for Covid-19

NBA superstar Kevin Durant said he is among the four Brooklyn Nets players to have tested positive for coronavirus, according to a report.
The Nets confirmed on Tuesday that four players had returned positive tests for Covid-19, less than a week after the global outbreak prompted the suspension of the NBA season.
Later on Tuesday, Durant confirmed to NBA reporter Shams Charania that he was one of them, adding: “Everyone be careful, take care of yourself and quarantine. We’re going to get through this.”

Shams Charania 
(@ShamsCharania)
Kevin Durant tested positive for coronavirus, Durant tells @TheAthleticNBA @Stadium. Durant says he is feeling fine: "Everyone be careful, take care of yourself and quarantine. We're going to get through this."

March 17, 2020

Three of the players were asymptomatic while one was showing symptoms of the rapidly-spreading virus, days after the Utah Jazz reported that two of their players had also tested positive.
The Nets said in a written statement that all four players were isolated and under the care of team physicians, but individuals remained unnamed until the two-time NBA finals Most Valuable Player came forward later in the afternoon.
“The organization is currently notifying anyone who has had known contact with the players, including recent opponents, and is working closely with state and local health authorities on reporting,” the team said.
“All players and members of the Nets travel party are being asked to remain isolated, closely monitor their health and maintain constant communication with team medical staff.”
The team last played against the Lakers in Los Angeles on 10 March. A day later, the league suspended its season until further notice, as the coronavirus pandemic upended major sporting events across the globe.
The Lakers will administer coronavirus testing on their players on Wednesday before going into a 14-day self-quarantine, according to a Los Angeles Times report.
For most people, the new coronavirus causes only mild or moderate symptoms, such as fever and coughing. For some, especially older adults and people with existing health problems, it can cause more severe illness, including pneumonia. The vast majority of people recover from the new virus.
The Nets said that all players and members of their travel party are being asked to remain isolated and closely monitor their health, but the team’s ability to get testing that has been unavailable to so many others drew criticism from New York mayor Bill de Blasio.

Mayor Bill de Blasio 
(@NYCMayor)
We wish them a speedy recovery. But, with all due respect, an entire NBA team should NOT get tested for COVID-19 while there are critically ill patients waiting to be tested. Tests should not be for the wealthy, but for the sick. https://t.co/7uQlL3zc7Z

March 17, 2020

“We wish them a speedy recovery. But, with all due respect, an entire NBA team should NOT get tested for COVID-19 while there are critically ill patients waiting to be tested,” De Blasio wrote on Twitter. “Tests should not be for the wealthy, but for the sick.”
The Nets were scheduled to face the Golden State Warriors on 12 March in San Francisco for a game that was to be played without fans before the NBA season was suspended after Utah’s Rudy Gobert tested positive for the Covid-19 virus.
“I saw that news,” Warriors coach Steve Kerr said of the Nets’ positive tests while speaking on a conference call. “I’m hoping none of our players went and hung out with guys the night before our game. I don’t know if that’s the case or not.”
Kerr added that he didn’t need to be convinced that suspending the season was the correct decision.
“I think everything that’s happened since the league shut down was enough proof that we did the right thing, that the NBA did the right thing and that we need to follow the advice of the experts out there and everybody’s got to do their part.”
Gobert’s Jazz teammate Donovan Mitchell and Detroit’s Christian Wood are the other NBA players who have tested positive.
The Nets said they are currently notifying anyone who has had known contact with the players, including recent opponents, and working closely with state and local health authorities on reporting.


Topics



Brooklyn Nets






NBA




Coronavirus outbreak




Basketball




US sports






Share on Facebook






Share on Twitter






Share via Email






Share on LinkedIn






Share on Pinterest






Share on WhatsApp






Share on Messenger








Reuse this content




 