Friday briefing: F1 non-starter, Canada PM's wife has Covid-19

Top story: Just like seasonal flu? ‘Alas that is not right’
Hello, Warren Murray with the final briefing of an extraordinary week.
The Australian opening round of the Formula One season this weekend has been cancelled at the last minute because of the coronavirus threat and disruption is spreading through football and other sporting codes – of which more in our sport section further down. Financial markets are headed for further losses after big falls on Wall Street yesterday reverberated through Sydney, Tokyo, Hong Kong and other exchanges today.
The virus has reached the highest levels of world leadership with Canada’s prime minister, Justin Trudeau, going into self-isolation after his wife, Sophie Grégoire Trudeau, tested positive for coronavirus, having fallen ill on her return from a visit to the UK. Boris Johnson says 10,000 people may already be infected in Britain, but the government is so far declining to follow countries like Ireland, France, Belgium, Malta, Denmark, Norway and Lithuania that are closing schools. Johnson contradicted Donald Trump and others who have said the virus is comparable to seasonal flu. “Alas that is not right,” the PM emphasised. “Due to the lack of immunity, this disease is more dangerous.”
Donald Trump’s response continues to attract criticism. The president is said to have no plans to get tested despite having stood right next to a top Brazilian government aide who has coronavirus. He has decided to stop holding rallies though. A top federal health official, Dr Anthony Fauci, has described the US’s lacklustre approach to coronavirus testing as “a failing”. Disneyland has closed parks in California, Florida and Paris. In Australia the day began with the F1 cancellation and, by the evening, the government was advising against mass gatherings and international travel.
The number of coronavirus infections globally now stands at 128,343 according to Johns Hopkins University. The virus has claimed the lives of 4,720 people since it was first detected in China in mid-December. More news all day at our live blog.
There’s more in our Coronavirus Extra section further down … and here’s where you can find all our coverage of the outbreak – from breaking news to fact checks and advice
Manning free again – A judge has ordered Chelsea Manning’s release from jail in Virginia where she was being held for refusing to testify about WikiLeaks to a grand jury. Manning leaked hundreds of thousands of documents and diplomatic cables in 2010. Ordering Manning’s release, Judge Anthony J Trenga wrote: “The court finds Ms Manning’s appearance before the grand jury is no longer needed, in light of which her detention no longer serves any coercive purpose.” Manning still faces fines of $256,000. She previously served six years in military custody for her part in the 2010 WikiLeaks disclosure – Barack Obama commuted her 35-year sentence before leaving office. An extradition hearing for Julian Assange, the founder of WikiLeaks, continues in London. In the US he is charged with violating the Espionage Act.
Met ‘underwhelming’ in Beech fraud response – The Metropolitan police were slow to learn lessons from the disastrous Operation Midland investigation of Carl Beech’s bogus claims of a VIP paedophile ring in Westminster, an official report has found. The inspectorate of constabulary (HMIC) found the Met’s response had been “underwhelming”, with senior officers failing to prioritise putting mistakes right. A previous investigation found a policy of believing the victim led astray detectives in Operation Midland. The policy was revised amid huge debate but David Tucker of the College of Policing, which sets standards for officers, said police “need to be clear that a victim is believed for the purposes of recording a crime unless there is evidence that the incident didn’t happen. Thereafter, an impartial investigation should follow.”
Police safe hid paedophile images – A hard drive containing indecent images of children was not used as evidence against a former lord mayor of Leeds and was instead kept in a police commissioner’s safe for 14 years. The hard drive belonged to Neil Taggart, who was jailed in 2017 after pleading guilty to charges relating to indecent images and videos of children. The offences were committed between 2007 and 2016, according to the Yorkshire Post, and did not relate to the hard drive. Taggart, who died in December, had also been chairman of the West Yorkshire police authority. Mark Burns-Williamson, the current West Yorkshire police commissioner, told the BBC of the hard drive: “Some images have been found on there, much later on, of course, and I can only assume he [Taggart] knew full well that was the case, and that’s why he asked for it to be stored. Of course, I’m sorry and I absolutely regret the fact that this hard drive existed and wasn’t discovered until 2017.”
Coronavirus Extra
A nurse fighting the coronavirus outbreak in Italy, which has claimed more than 1,000 lives, describes the experience as “war-like”. Roberta Re works at Piacenza hospital in the Emilia-Romagna region: “It’s a war that isn’t fightable with traditional arms … the only weapon we do have to avoid things getting even worse is to stay at home and to respect the rules, to do what they did in China, as this is paying off.” In Iran, eerie satellite images showing what appears to be the digging of mass graves have increased suspicions that the government is hiding the true extent of the outbreak there.
Infectious diseases expert John Swartzberg says testing for Covid-19 in the US has been “woefully inadequate” and “massively bungled”. Julian Borger, the Guardian’s world affairs editor, indicts Donald Trump, saying his selfishness and instinct to lash out at others when things go wrong make him the “worst person imaginable” to handle this crisis.
Taiwan, meanwhile, appears to be doing an admirable job of keeping coronavirus in check despite not being allowed into the World Health Organization, because of China’s objections. And Gaby Hinsliff postulates that while coronavirus will pass, life may never be normal again: with meetings being scrapped, hours cut, work-from-home implemented and the need for exams questioned, some changes are bound to stick.
Today in Focus podcast: Can the NHS cope with coronavirus?
NHS staff are bracing for a surge in hospital admissions as the number of people in the UK with coronavirus continues to rise. The Guardian’s health policy editor, Denis Campbell, looks at how well equipped the health service is for the crisis. Plus: Charlotte Graham-McLay on the Christchurch massacre, one year on.

Today in Focus
Can the NHS handle Covid-19?

 Sorry your browser does not support audio - but you can download here and listen https://audio.guim.co.uk/2020/03/12-76989-20200312_TIF_NHS.mp3 






00:00:00




00:27:05




Lunchtime read: Licence to burn money
“The more boilers and the more you burned the richer you became. The result was a scramble to install boilers and run them 24/7. Farmers, went the joke, were using oven gloves to open sheds.” Rory Carroll on the “cash for ash” scandal in Northern Ireland that brought down a power-sharing government, paralysed Stormont politics for three years and is the subject of an almost certainly scalding judgment to be delivered today.


 
 

 
 Facebook 
 
 Twitter 
 
 Pinterest 


 DUP leader and first minister Arlene Foster introduced the flawed Renewable Heat Initiative in 2012. Photograph: Charles McQuillan/Getty Images
It all stems from the renewable heat initiative (RHI), launched in 2012 as a UK-wide effort to subsidise a switch from fossil fuels to renewables. In Northern Ireland, the government department then run by Arlene Foster decided to make the subsidy more valuable than the cost of the wood pellets used to heat boilers – so the more you burned, the more money you were paid. They thought the UK Treasury would foot the bill. It didn’t – and in 2017 the whole thing came crashing down, along with the devolved government.
Sport
Premier League clubs are preparing for the football season to be suspended after the Arsenal manager, Mikel Arteta, tested positive for coronavirus on Thursday night and their match on Saturday against Brighton was postponed. Chelsea also went into lockdown after winger Callum Hudson-Odoi tested positive, while Uefa is considering postponing the European Championship until 2021 as it attempts to deal with the escalating pandemic. The PGA Tour scrapped the rest of the Players Championship, and shut down its other tournaments for the next three weeks, while in the US most major leagues shut down. There was some football in Austria though, where Manchester United cruised to a 5-0 win over Lask in the Europa League, albeit in front of empty stands. The England and Wales Cricket Board has insisted the two-Test series against Sri Lanka that begins on 19 March remains on, but also urged travelling supporters due to arrive in the coming days to keep up to date with the latest government advice. And Joe Marler has been banned for 10 weeks for grabbing Alun Wyn Jones’s genitals during England’s victory over Wales last weekend, ensuring his season is in effect over.
Business
Shares have plunged in Asia today, with benchmarks in Japan, Thailand and India sinking as much as 10%. Trading was halted temporarily in Bangkok and in Mumbai after the main benchmarks in both markets hit the 10% downside limit. After trading resumed, Thailand’s SET 100 was down 8.7% and the Sensex in Mumbai was down 9.4%. Losses in mainland China, where communities are recovering from the worst of the virus, were more modest, with the Shanghai Composite index down 3%. The pound is worth $1.255 and €1.120 at time of writing.
The papers
Various paraphrased versions of a quote that really hit home – “Many more families are going to lose loved ones before their time” – dominate the papers’ front-page treatment of the coronavirus crisis today. The Guardian also highlights that Britain’s schools are staying open whereas European nations are closing theirs.


 
 

 
 Facebook 
 
 Twitter 
 
 Pinterest 


 Guardian front page, Friday 13 March 2020. Photograph: Guardian
The Express picks up on Boris Johnson declaring it the “worst public health crisis in a generations”. The Mail flags “Worst City crash since 1987 as global fears soar”. The Telegraph carries the line that “10,000 may already be infected” in Britain.
The i goes with the practicalities: “Virus advice – stay home if you have new cough or fever” – advice repeated by the Times which superimposes a stock market graph on the sombre-looking PM. Its front-page sidebar is: “Worst day for markets since Black Monday crash of 1987”. This of course is the FT’s turf and it has “Traumatic day on global markets spurs central banks to step up action” – the US Fed is to inject $1.5tn into the financial system. The Mirror asks “Is it enough?” and has the former health secretary, Jeremy Hunt, saying: “Many people will be surprised and concerned we are not moving sooner” because the PM has not closed schools or banned public gatherings.
Sign up

The Guardian Morning Briefing is delivered to thousands of inboxes bright and early every weekday. If you are not already receiving it by email, you can sign up here.
For more news: www.theguardian.com

Topics



Guardian morning briefing








Share on Facebook






Share on Twitter






Share via Email






Share on LinkedIn






Share on Pinterest






Share on WhatsApp






Share on Messenger








Reuse this content




 