Uefa to reschedule Women's Euro 2021 after men's tournament moved

Uefa today confirmed that the 2021 Women’s European Championship in England will be rescheduled to accommodate the men’s edition, which was due to take place this summer but was pushed back a year as football attempts to get to grips with the coronavirus crisis.
With the start of the men’s tournament postponed until 11 June 2021 and the Wembley final set for 11 July, there is a four-day overlap with the women’s tournament, which was due to kick off on 7 July at Old Trafford.



Euro 2020 postponed for a year by Uefa because of coronavirus crisis







Read more





The Guardian understands that, despite some federations believing this to mean the women’s tournament will fill the vacant summer 2022 slot– the men’s World Cup is being held in the winter – the option of playing the two European tournaments back to back in 2021 is still very much on the table.
Uefa’s president, Aleksander Ceferin, hinted that the former may be preferred when he told the Associated Press that it was “one of the most likely [possibilities] to happen”.
”We are thinking of postponing this Women’s Euro and Under-21 championship as well,” he said. “We will have to postpone both because I don’t think that we should cannibalise the women’s Euro with the men’s Euro just one month before.”
Both options have their pitfalls. Pushing the women’s Euros back to 2022 would mean, with the future of the Olympics in question, that there could be a three-year gap in top-level international women’s football. Sponsorship cycles would likely need to be renegotiated. There would probably be implications for European qualifying for the 2023 World Cup, too.
Moving the competition to 2022 would also throw up some interesting issues for the FA and the Lionesses. Phil Neville’s contract is up for renewal in 2021, after the women’s Euros as presently scheduled, and there has been a feeling that, despite England’s poor run of form, the short window before the Lionesses bid for a European trophy on home soil means changing the manager would be difficult. While the FA have privately said they are fully behind Neville, a change in the calendar could prompt a shift in attitudes were a new candidate able to have time in which to influence the team’s fortunes.



Cursed Euro 2020 might just give us what we need next year | Barney Ronay







Read more





There is also the issue of whether Neville himself wishes to continue for an additional year. Furthermore, the ageing Lionesses, many of whom have been targeting the home tournament for their international swansong, would also be forced to consider whether they will be able play on at the top level for an extra year.
However, persisting with the tournament in 2021 would see the buildup to it consumed by the men’s tournament, going head to head with it for column inches and airtime, and there will likely be fears of the summer reaching a football saturation point before a ball is kicked at Old Trafford.


Topics



Women's football






news






Share on Facebook






Share on Twitter






Share via Email






Share on LinkedIn






Share on Pinterest






Share on WhatsApp






Share on Messenger








Reuse this content




 