'I don't think anything would stop these fans from coming'

On Wednesday, as Atletico Madrid fans descended on Liverpool for a crucial Champions League tie, the number of coronavirus cases diagnosed in the Spanish capital exceeded 1000.
But even as sporting fixtures across Europe were facing cancellation, Liverpool fans seemed less worried about their health than about their chances in Europe – and the surreal possibility of the virus denying the club its first title in over 30 years.
“To be honest I was more worried about them cancelling the Premier league than the virus,” said Lewis, a plasterer from Wales. 
“We can’t be nervous about coronavirus because we have to go out and work,” he went on. “The government aren’t going to pay my rent. Anyway, it can’t be that bad otherwise tonight would have been cancelled.”
The Park pub, opposite the stadium was already busy by mid-afternoon with Liverpool fans – the only visible precaution being the bartenders wearing latex gloves.
Leanne, one of the bartenders said she was “not worried at all” about the coronavirus as she poured another pint. “I don’t really think about it. I can’t.”
Two other Liverpool fans, Robin and Dave, had travelled from Bristol for the game. They weren’t worried about being at a large scale public event with hundreds of other fans. “I won’t be kissing any of the Madrid fans, or shaking hands, but maybe fist-bumps,” Dave said.
Rupert has sold badges and other merchandise for football games for over 30 years and today was no different.
“I love interaction and I love meeting and talking with people, and I can’t stop doing my job because of the virus,” he said.
He too was undeterred by the coronavirus and decided to carry on selling merchandise in anticipation for tonight’s game. “They couldn’t have cancelled tonight’s game,” he said. “If they did, or if they decided to do it behind closed doors tens of thousands of fans would line the streets, ticket holders would be upset.”
“There is a lot riding on this game, and I don’t think anything would stop these fans from coming.”
The staff at the Home Baked bakery have said they have welcomed fans from Madrid as well as home fans leading up to the game.
“We work quite well with Liverpool FC and we decided to go ahead because they did,” one worker said. The bakery makes most of its income from game days and said they would need to make an action plan if future games were to be called off. “There were loads of Madrid fans in today and they were all in good spirits. We wouldn’t want to push people away, so for us it’s business as usual.”
“None of the locals seem to be bothered about the Madrid fans coming here either.”
By Matthews Street, close to the city centre, there were dozens of fans in support of the Spanish team.
Gabriella, an Atletico fan who arrived in Liverpool on Tuesday, said she was “surprised” that the match was going forward despite other games in Europe being played privately. “I thought tonight would have the same fate,” she said.
In a statement before the match, Liverpool emphasised that hand sanitisers and handwash would be widely available and handshakes would be avoided on the pitch. “Any supporter displaying symptoms that are consistent with coronavirus should ensure they familiarise themselves with the chief medical officer’s advice on self isolation,” the statement added.
But back at The Park pub, Robin and Dave were too preoccupied with the match to be concerned. In any case, they said, as self-employed painters and decorators, they have to travel and interact with lots of people for their jobs. “Nothing would stop us from missing this game,” Dave said.


Topics



Liverpool






Coronavirus outbreak




Infectious diseases




Atlético Madrid




Champions League




news






Share on Facebook






Share on Twitter






Share via Email






Share on LinkedIn






Share on Pinterest






Share on WhatsApp






Share on Messenger








Reuse this content




 