Pandemic: Netflix's new series about global outbreaks is eerily timed, and moved me to tears

How’s that for timing?
Netflix’s new, terrifying docuseries Pandemic has dropped just as a new, terrifying virus has landed in real life.
While coronavirus dominates news headlines, Netflix is streaming its six-part series on how prepared (or not) the world is to deal with a new pandemic.
Pandemic: How to Prevent an Outbreak starts with a theory: that we’re due for a new, fast-moving deadly virus. It’s been 100 years since a deadly influenza virus killed 50 to 100 million people, at a time when the global population was just two billion (cue black and white footage of people in old timey face masks, with loads of mass graves being dug).
Now there are nearly eight billion people in the world, as expert Dr. Dennis Carroll, director of USAID’s Emerging Threats Unit, warns in Pandemic: “When we talk about another flu pandemic happening, it’s not a matter of if, but when.”
Could the “when” that haunts this scary series be now?






 
 Facebook 
 
 Twitter 
 
 Pinterest 

As of writing, the death toll of coronavirus is nearly 500 people; it has spread to 28 countries, and the global number of confirmed cases is well over 24,000.
As well as loss of life, the virus has caused widespread disruption to financial markets, workplaces, flight patterns and food production – effects predicted and examined with great flair, detail and drama in Pandemic.
One of the executive producers, Sheri Fink, is a journalist, doctor and author of the brilliant Five Days at Memorial, about unpreparedness for Hurricane Katrina. Tweeting about the uncanny timing of the series this week, she said, “We hoped to inform before, not after, another dangerous pathogen emerged.”

Sheri Fink 
(@sherifink)
People have said the docuseries Pandemic came out at a perfect time, but in fact we made it because some of us had seen the system tested in smaller ways and knew its vulnerabilities. We hoped to inform before, not after, another dangerous pathogen emerged.

February 2, 2020

As a result of coronavirus, viewers will come to the series with an extra level of awareness of the risks of a fast-moving, mysterious virus. But don’t let the fear factor put you off. Pandemic is also informative, inspiring, visually stunning and a great piece of storytelling.
Produced by Zero Point Zero Productions, who also created Anthony Bourdain’s shows, it introduces viewers to a range of characters whose stories unfold as the series gallops across the globe.
The heroes are the scientists, doctors and disaster experts. We follow Dr Syra Madad as she tries to get the New York City hospital system ready for a deadly pandemic, despite budget cuts. We meet Jake Glanville and Sarah Ives, two scientists who are trying to create a global one-shot flu vaccine that they can make available for free to people in developing countries. We go to Jaipur and tour the wards of an overcrowded hospital with Dr. Dinesh Vijay, and head to the poultry markets of Vietnam with Dennis Carroll.
If there is a villain here, it’s not just the virus itself but misinformation that often spreads in tandem with a pandemic.



Experts warn world ‘grossly unprepared’ for future pandemics







Read more





Using a similar technique to the film Contagion, the show jumps around the world – from ICE holding camps on the US border, to an underfunded county hospital in Oklahoma, to protests by anti-vaxxers in Oregon, to the fight in the Congo to contain the Ebola virus.
I was moved to tears multiple times – not from fear of what might be coming for us, but from the kindness and dedication of those who work in the field.
Health care workers die and get murdered while treating the Ebola virus in Africa. Indian doctors in overcrowded hospitals for the poor face 1,000 patients a day presenting with serious swine flu symptoms.
There are volunteers giving flu shots at the border, the overworked doctors who rarely see their own kids, the ambitious scientists looking for vaccines while working outside big pharma – all of it shows that people working in strong systems, with decent funding and the cooperation of governments and citizens, can make significant advances.
And when the worst happens? According to Carroll, “Every epidemic is an opportunity to learn.”
• Pandemic: How to Prevent an Outbreak is streaming now on Netflix


Topics



Television & radio




Screen bites






Documentary




Television




Netflix




Coronavirus outbreak




Infectious diseases




Medical research




reviews






Share on Facebook






Share on Twitter






Share via Email






Share on LinkedIn






Share on Pinterest






Share on WhatsApp






Share on Messenger








Reuse this content




 