Readers recommend: podcasts to binge on while you're cooped up in self-isolation

Spectacular Failures
This podcast tackles the biggest business failures of all time. It’s very American, but once you get used to the host’s style, you really do learn something new about corporate crookedness in a way most of us can understand. It’s a collaboration with the University of Minnesota, so they know their stuff, although at times quite funny it’s clear they are very rigorous. The episodes about Trump’s Atlantic City Casinos and Toys R Us are the best. – Barbara1970
The Adam Buxton podcast
Entertaining “ramble chats’” with a wide variety of guests – comedians, authors, actors, musicians… Perfect for taking my mind off the torture of running. – titchyface



Coronavirus solitude? Podcasts to binge on while you're social distancing







Read more





Richard Herring’s body of work
Everything Richard Herring has done: RHLSTP, Me1 and M2 Snooker, in which he plays himself at snooker, and Stone Clearing. It’ll keep you going for ages and consider bunging him some cash for a huge amount of quality stuff. He’s also looking to raise cash for out-of-work performers. He’s an all-round good egg, and a funny one at that. – Zyxt12
Sombrero Fallout
If you like alternative music with a different theme each time (who among us doesn’t?), this is an excellent series of hour-long podcasts, covering stuff such as The Kraftwerk Influence and Female Post-Punk Icons. The chap hosting it has a very soothing Peel-like delivery, perfect for the commute or your enforced isolation. –merepseudmaged


 
 

 
 Facebook 
 
 Twitter 
 
 Pinterest 


 The presenters of the podcast My Dad Wrote A Porno. Photograph: PR company handout
My Dad Wrote a Porno
Obviously! The funniest podcast ever, and best listened to in private so people don’t keep looking at you as you burst out laughing or spluttering in horror. – Confinedtohouse
The Worst Sitcom Ever Made
About a terrible attempt at making an American-style sitcom in New Zealand in the 90s. It’s a funny story that turns into a meditation on failure and the twists and turns that life, and careers can take. Highly recommended. – CommanderMaxil



Forty Australian bands couldn't play South by South West. Listen to their music here







Read more





You’re Dead to Me
From the History category, by Greg Jenner and guests. A comedian and a historian go over an event or person you think you know about from history or is undeservingly low profile. I learnt a bit and laughed a bit. – Always_Outraged
Lost in Larrimah
Six episodes of Australian Gothic on the true life disappearance of Paddy Moriarty in the Northern Territory. Wry but haunting, think Fargo with Akubra hats. Best Australian narrative podcast ever. – Ozziecrobar


Topics



Podcasts




The good place






features






Share on Facebook






Share on Twitter






Share via Email






Share on LinkedIn






Share on Pinterest






Share on WhatsApp






Share on Messenger








Reuse this content




 