Morning mail: 'Test, test, test,' says WHO, stock market mayhem, Olympics to go ahead

Good morning, this is James Murray bringing you the main stories and must-reads on Tuesday 17 March.
Coronavirus
The World Health Organization is urging governments worldwide to ramp up their testing for Covid-19. WHO head Dr Tedros Adhanom Ghebreyesus said: “We have not seen an urgent enough escalation in testing, isolation and contact tracing, which is the backbone of the response … we have a simple message for all countries: test, test, test. Test every suspected case.” Ghebreyesus made his comments as the EU emulated other countries and instigated its own 30-day travel ban. The ban applies to all non-essential travel through or within the EU’s borders. Meanwhile, in the UK, Boris Johnson has advised that the whole country should now avoid all non-essential contact. None of this was good news for the stock markets, which fell again despite stimulus from central banks. And Canada has closed its borders to all foreign nationals except for US citizens.
There are now more than 170,000 confirmed cases worldwide, and just over 7,000 deaths. The Guardian has produced detailed maps of the outbreak, showing which areas have been worst hit and the speed in which the virus travelled the world. With the numbers steadily climbing, the search for a vaccine continues at pace. The first human trial for a vaccine made in the US is under way. The trial, taking place at the Kaiser Permanente Washington Health Research Institute in Seattle, will involve 45 young, healthy volunteers who will be given shots of the vaccine. About 35 companies and academic institutions are also in the race, at least four of which already have candidates they have been testing in animals. Donald Trump’s attempt to buy exclusive access to a vaccine made in Germany has caused further outrage. “Germany is not for sale,” economy minister Peter Altmaier told broadcaster ARD, while Diarmaid McDonald argues that Trump’s brazen attempt is symptomatic of the pharmaceutical industry as a whole. Vaccines aside, hospitals are bracing for the impact of mass infections – Laura Spinney takes a look inside a French hospital preparing for the worst. Idris Elba is the latest star to be diagnosed with Covid-19, after coming into contact with Sophie Grégoire Trudeau, the wife of the Canadian prime minister who has also since tested positive for the virus.
There was mayhem on the Australian stock market, which saw the benchmark ASX200 tumble by almost 10%; the biggest one-day fall in decades. The Morrison government has signalled a second round of stimulus is coming for sectors bearing the brunt of the economic shock. That may well need to include the agricultural sector, with farmers concerned about lost harvests if they are unable to access overseas workforces. The newly minted national cabinet will discuss banning groups of more than 100 people when it meets today. Coronavirus tests, which can provide a diagnosis in three hours, are being rushed to Australia. The new testing kits are expected to begin arriving in Australia by Wednesday. Their arrival will be timely as the demand for testing kits is now causing “considerable strain”. The Australian Medical Association told the Guardian on Monday that some jurisdictions had failed to properly stockpile a common reagent critical in the testing of coronavirus. The spread of the virus has led to some countries closing schools, but that has not yet happened in Australia. Paul Karp explains why. Guardian Australian columnist and oncologist Dr Ranjana Srivatava writes that we must have an honest conversation about intensive care beds. And Indigenous communities are particularly at risk from the virus, which makes the decision to tell Aboriginal people who work for the dole to show up for group activities as usual particularly concerning.
In the US, New York, New Jersey and Connecticut have closed bars and restaurants amid widespread concern that the Trump administration is failing to manage the virus. “I think it actually feeds the feeling that the country’s out of control. There is no clear direction, there is no clear path,” said New York’s governor, Andrew Cuomo. Graeme Simpson asks why there isn’t better access to Covid-19 testing, while parents in New York desperately struggle for childcare and food after schools were shut until 20 April. Water shutoffs for Americans who cannot afford their bills have been suspended in 90 states and cities. San Francisco and reportedly five other Bay Area counties in California have ordered all residents to shelter-in-place to curb the spread of coronavirus, in a drastic move similar to ones taken in Italy, Spain and China, but the first of its kind in the US.
Australia
Australia’s unemployed fear having payments cut off during the Covid-19 outbreak. People who receive payments such as Newstart must record their job searches online and attend meetings with employment services agencies, and the government has indicated there will be no reprieve from these obligations, even for those with chronic health conditions.
Remote Aboriginal communities may need to rely on the army being deployed in the event of a coronavirus outbreak. The National Aboriginal Community Controlled Health Organisation said governments should consider deploying the army in remote areas, where health workers face major challenges in containing any outbreak.
The world


 
 

 
 Facebook 
 
 Twitter 
 
 Pinterest 


 Spain’s King Felipe VI and his father King Emeritus Juan Carlos I. Photograph: Juanjo Martin/AFP via Getty Images
Spain’s King Felipe VI has renounced his personal inheritance from his father and stripped the former king Juan Carlos of his annual stipend. The move comes after allegations he was poised to receive millions of euros from a secret offshore fund with ties to Saudi Arabia.
Speculation abounds in the US Democratic primary race as frontrunner Joe Biden confirmed he would name a woman as running mate. Stacey Abrams and Kamala Harris lead the list of veep contenders.
Steve Green, founder of Washington DC’s Museum of the Bible, paid millions for fragments of the Dead Sea Scrolls. It has now emerged that the scrolls are all fakes, likely made from old shoe leather.
Amazon has banned the sale of most editions of Mein Kampf. The ban includes a wider list of Nazi propaganda books as well.
Recommended reads


 
 

 
 Facebook 
 
 Twitter 
 
 Pinterest 


 ‘What’s going on? … I can’t afford to stockpile … what do I do?’ Photograph: Maskot/Getty Images
Looking after each other is more and more important as the effects of the coronavirus take their toll, but how to do that while practising social distancing? From swapping supplies to helping elderly neighbours, Australians are coordinating online to seek solace and share practical tips. Social distancing can be hard to pull off. Danielle Renwick explains how to do it like an expert. And Rhiannon Lucy Coslett takes some time to consider the impact of the virus on people who suffer from health anxiety.
A black Little Mermaid inspired an ugly reaction on social media, with some users flocking to the #Notmymermaid hashtag. But as Monique Roffey writes, dark-skinned water goddesses swam in our imaginations long before Ariel. In July, 2019, Disney announced that R&B singer and actor Halle Bailey would play Ariel in the live action remake of their hugely successful 1989 film, The Little Mermaid. The backlash was predictable with petitions claiming that a black mermaid was “a betrayal of Ariel’s original creator”. Roffey points out that one of the first folkloric instances of a mermaid was black. Atargatis was an Assyrian goddess, who had a human lover called Hadad, a shepherd, whom she killed by accident. It turns out the history of mermaids is much more diverse than the Hans Christian Anderson fairytale would suggest.
Listen
The Full Story podcast looks into social distancing and asks how it saves lives amid the coronavirus outbreak. Countries around the world are closing schools, universities, workplaces and cancelling mass events. But how does “social distancing” work? And is Australia doing enough?

Full Story
Coronavirus: what is social distancing and how can it save lives?

 Sorry your browser does not support audio - but you can download here and listen https://audio.guim.co.uk/2020/03/16-36492-FS_covidfrontline.mp3 






00:00:00




00:28:04




Full Story is Guardian Australia’s news podcast. Subscribe for free on Apple Podcasts, Spotify or any other podcasting app.
Sport
The IOC has ruled out staging the Olympics behind closed doors. One source said: “It would go against everything we stand for. The Olympics is more than just a series of competitions, it is about bringing everyone together to celebrate sport.”
The Formula One team Pirelli says a team member has tested positive for coronavirus. It is the second confirmed Covid-19 infection within F1.
And if you would like a rather depressing read, here is a list of all the major cancellations in the sporting calendar. So far.
Media roundup
The Australian’s coronavirus focus is very much on the stock market. Much of their website is given over to stories on the crash and a second round of economic stimulus. There’s a different approach over at the Sydney Morning Herald, which leads with its liveblog and a news story about increasing anxiety around testing. Predictions on the eventual death toll in Australia occupy the Age, with their lead story citing a worst-case scenario in which there are up to 150,000 deaths. And news.com.au warns that most of the world’s airlines could be bankrupt by May.
Coming up
The federal court is set to hand down its decision about whether federal treasurer, Josh Frydenberg, is eligible to sit in parliament.

Topics



Guardian Australia's morning mail








Share on Facebook






Share on Twitter






Share via Email






Share on LinkedIn






Share on Pinterest






Share on WhatsApp






Share on Messenger








Reuse this content




 