'Sending love': German music venues emptied by Covid-19 livestream concerts

<U+FEFF>Amid widescale closures of cultural venues across the world in an attempt to stem the spread of coronavirus, classical music venues in Europe have turned to livestreaming their concerts in an effort to comfort music fans.
At Staatsoper Berlin the curtain went up on a production of Bizet’s Carmen as planned on Thursday evening, under the baton of Daniel Barenboim, before empty stalls.



Coronavirus and culture – a list of major cancellations







Read more





Local broadcaster RBB, in collaboration with the Staatsoper, livestreamed a Geister (ghost) performance, starring Georgian mezzo soprano Anita Rachvelishvili, on the opera house’s website and it was also broadcast simultaneously on radio. The performers, all of whom played for free, applauded themselves at the end in place of the usual rousing appreciation and foot-stamping of a Berlin audience.
“The mood amongst the performers had been extremely down when it became clear we would have to close the house to the public,” Matthias Schulz, the director of the Staatsoper, told the Guardian. “But there was a lot of enthusiasm about the idea of bringing the opera to the people despite the house being ordered to close to the public.
“During the performance we could see that people had tuned in from around the world, about 160,000 in total, which is a staggering figure for us, and made us realise how important culture is in a time of crisis and ‘Corona-depression’.”


 
 

 
 Facebook 
 
 Twitter 
 
 Pinterest 


 Anita Rachvelishvili. Photograph: Catherine Ashmore
Rachvelishvili said after the performance: “It was a sad and painful feeling to perform in an empty opera house. But my heart was still full of joy because I knew that this way we were bringing art and music to everybody’s homes worldwide.”
Messages left on the Staatsoper’s Facebook page and elsewhere on social media were full of praise for the opera house’s decision to take its production to the world, despite the forced closure by Berlin authorities. Among the viewers were people in quarantine in Italy, including employees of La Scala, Milan’s opera house, who are currently in lockdown, the Staatsoper said.
On Thursday night, Sir Simon Rattle conducted the Berlin Philharmoniker in a concert which was also broadcast live for free.
Speaking ahead of the performances by Luciano Berio and Béla Bartók, Rattle said: “On this strange day where we perform for you out there while we’re performing just for us in the hall, we hope you are here with us ... we hope that simply playing sends a signal and we send much love and more music to you out there in the real world.”
Q&A How can I protect myself and others from the coronavirus outbreak?  
 Show 
 Hide  
The World Health Organization is recommending that people take simple precautions to reduce exposure to and transmission of the coronavirus, for which there is no specific cure or vaccine.
The UN agency advises people to:
Frequently wash their hands with an alcohol-based hand rub or warm water and soap
Cover their mouth and nose with a flexed elbow or tissue when sneezing or coughing
Avoid close contact with anyone who has a fever or cough
Seek early medical help if they have a fever, cough and difficulty breathing, and share their travel history with healthcare providers
Many countries are now enforcing or recommending curfews or lockdowns. 
In the UK, NHS advice is that anyone with symptoms should stay at home for at least 7 days.
If you live with other people, they should stay at home for at least 14 days, to avoid spreading the infection outside the home.



Was this helpful?







Thank you for your feedback.

At the Elbphilharmonie concert house on the banks of the Elbe River in Hamburg, British singer James Blunt also took to the stage last Wednesday in an empty hall which would normally have been packed with over 2,000 fans. Rather than call off the concert, Blunt livestreamed a performance for free, attracting viewers from across the globe. 
Other artists, from poets to pianists, have taken to social media to console their fans. From Ian McMillan, the so-called Bard of Barnsley, in Yorkshire, with his coronavirus poetry, to the German-Russian virtuoso pianist Igor Levit, who on Saturday, regaled his 58,000 Twitter followers with Brahm’s adaptation of Bach’s Chaconne in D-minor, calling it a “life-affirming work ... which also offers consolation”, the offerings have been many and varied.


 
 

 
 Facebook 
 
 Twitter 
 
 Pinterest 


 James Blunt livestreamed a free performance from the Elbphilharmonie, in Hamburg, pictured. Photograph: Michael Pasdzior/Getty Images
With German cultural venues from theatres and music clubs to concert halls and cabaret bars forced to close at least until 19 April, online petitions have been set up by freelance artists concerned that many who already live a precarious existence will be among those worst-hit economically.

Germany’s culture minister, Monika Grüttgers, has promised a special fund of billions of euros of financial help for artists and cultural venues.
“Amid a fall in tourism and restrictions on large gatherings and events, I’m aware that this situation places a huge burden on the cultural and creative industries and can cause considerable distress, especially for smaller institutions and independent artists,” she said in a statement. The culture ministry had drawn up financial measures to help “those art institutions and creatives who are facing uncertainty”, she added.


Topics



Coronavirus outbreak






Germany




Opera




Classical music




Europe




Infectious diseases




news






Share on Facebook






Share on Twitter






Share via Email






Share on LinkedIn






Share on Pinterest






Share on WhatsApp






Share on Messenger








Reuse this content




 