Apple closes all stores around world outside China due to Covid-19

Apple is to close all its shops outside China for the next two weeks to combat the coronavirus pandemic.
The company, which has hundreds of outlets worldwide including dozens in the UK, said it was shutting in an effort to minimise the transmission of the disease.
The firm’s chief executive, Tim Cook, said: “We must do all we can to prevent the spread of Covid-19.”
Q&A How can I protect myself and others from the coronavirus outbreak?  
 Show 
 Hide  
The World Health Organization is recommending that people take simple precautions to reduce exposure to and transmission of the coronavirus, for which there is no specific cure or vaccine.
The UN agency advises people to:
Frequently wash their hands with an alcohol-based hand rub or warm water and soap
Cover their mouth and nose with a flexed elbow or tissue when sneezing or coughing
Avoid close contact with anyone who has a fever or cough
Seek early medical help if they have a fever, cough and difficulty breathing, and share their travel history with healthcare providers
Many countries are now enforcing or recommending curfews or lockdowns. 
In the UK, NHS advice is that anyone with symptoms should stay at home for at least 7 days.
If you live with other people, they should stay at home for at least 14 days, to avoid spreading the infection outside the home.



Was this helpful?







Thank you for your feedback.

Apple stores in China, where coronavirus originated, reopened on Saturday and will be exempt from the shutdown as new cases in the country are slowing.
Apple has already shifted its appearance at the Worldwide Developer Conference in California in June to an online format instead of several days of public gatherings.
Cook tweeted: “In our workplaces and communities, we must do all we can to prevent the spread of Covid-19. Apple will be temporarily closing all stores outside of Greater China until 27 March and committing $15M (£12.25m) to help with worldwide recovery.”
In a statement, the company added: “As rates of new infections continue to grow in other places, we’re taking additional steps to protect our team members and customers.
“In all of our offices, we are moving to flexible work arrangements worldwide outside of Greater China. That means team members should work remotely if their job allows, and those whose work requires them to be on site should follow guidance to maximise interpersonal space.
“Extensive deep cleaning will continue at all sites. In all our offices, we are rolling out new health screenings and temperature checks. All of our hourly workers will continue to receive pay in alignment with business-as-usual operations.
“We have expanded our leave policies to accommodate personal or family health circumstances created by Covid-19 - including recovering from an illness, caring for a sick loved one, mandatory quarantining, or childcare challenges due to school closures.”


Topics



Coronavirus outbreak






Apple




China




Infectious diseases




news






Share on Facebook






Share on Twitter






Share via Email






Share on LinkedIn






Share on Pinterest






Share on WhatsApp






Share on Messenger








Reuse this content




 