Coronavirus death toll in UK doubles in 24 hours

The coronavirus death toll in the UK has nearly doubled in just 24 hours, with the number of confirmed cases of the disease surging by hundreds overnight.
Ten more patients, all of whom had underlying health conditions, have died after contracting the virus – bringing the total fatalities in the country so far from 11 to 21.
The deaths came as the number of people in the UK testing positive for Covid-19 rose from 798 on Friday to 1,140 on Saturday, the Department of Health and Social Care said.

Department of Health and Social Care 
(@DHSCgovuk)
UPDATE on coronavirus (#COVID19) testing in the UK:As of 9am on 14 March, a total of 37,746 have been tested: 36,606 negative1140 positiveAcross the UK, 21 patients who tested positive for coronavirus (COVID-19) have sadly died. pic.twitter.com/YEo5QOEGzX

March 14, 2020

It follows Boris Johnson’s warning that many more families would “lose loved ones before their time” and as the government comes under increasing criticism over its approach to combat the pandemic.
On Saturday, World Health Organization spokeswoman Margaret Harris questioned the government’s “herd immunity” strategy, which relies on large numbers of people – around 60% of the population – getting the disease and becoming immune as a result. 



Coronavirus UK cases: find out how many are in your area







Read more





It has been suggested No 10 has performed a U-turn by announcing late on Friday that mass gatherings will be banned from next weekend although schools are expected to remain open. The government is due to plough ahead with emergency legislation next week likely to include compensation for organisations forced to cancel events as well as powers to temporarily detain sufferers if needed.
Meanwhile, a newborn baby in London has tested positive for coronavirus in what is thought to be the youngest such case in the UK. The child’s mother, who was taken to a north London hospital days before the birth with suspected pneumonia, has also contracted the virus.
The number of confirmed UK cases, while unofficially thought to be as high as 10,000, has increased from 456 on Wednesday to the latest figure topping 1,000. Globally, there have been more than 149,000 confirmed cases and 5,600 deaths, according to figures provided by the Johns Hopkins University Center for Systems Science and Engineering.
Prof Chris Whitty, the chief medical officer for England, announced the new deaths on Saturday. The 10 patients were being cared for across the country at nine trusts including Buckinghamshire, Sandwell & West Birmingham, Wolverhampton, Leicester, Barts, London, north Middlesex and Chester. At least eight of the patients were men. The youngest was in his late 70s and the oldest in his 90s.
Whitty said: “I am sorry to confirm 10 further patients who have tested positive for Covid-19 in England have died.
“All 10 individuals were in the at-risk groups. I understand this increase in the number of deaths linked to Covid-19 will be a cause for concern for many.
“The public should know every measure we are taking is seeking to save lives and protect the most vulnerable.
“Every single one of us has a role to play in achieving this. If you have a new continuous cough or high temperature, please stay at home for seven days.
“I also encourage everyone to be washing their hands for 20 seconds regularly. I offer my sincere condolences to the families and friends who have received this difficult news. I ask that their privacy is respected at this time.”
The first person in the UK to die after testing positive to coronavirus was announced on 5 March. In total, 37,746 people have been tested in the UK to date, of which 36,606 were confirmed negative.


Topics



Coronavirus outbreak






Infectious diseases




news






Share on Facebook






Share on Twitter






Share via Email






Share on LinkedIn






Share on Pinterest






Share on WhatsApp






Share on Messenger








Reuse this content




 