Skype lessons and exercise plans: how older people are preparing for lockdown

This is not going to be easy. While the government dithers, I have been self-isolating for a week (doctor’s advice for an existing cough). Plenty of other over 80s have been doing so, too: it is the sad destiny of the old and unfit to live that way already.
On the other hand, one of the joys of a healthy old age is the freedom it can bring those with children grown up, mortgage paid off, adequate pension. It is time to enjoy ourselves. And the old know how: witness the thriving golf clubs, bowling clubs, membership of friends groups – the National Trust, Royal Academy, theatres and orchestras around the country. Old people are the mainstay of their membership, volunteers and audiences. Then there are the outings: off-peak day returns to places of interest, a walk in the countryside and home before the crowds hit. Many of us live charmed lives.
So it is indeed a big ask. People with less life left than others are being asked to give up its remaining pleasures. No one is thinking this through … except the old themselves. Our younger family members need to help us do this: encouraging us to stay home and explaining how this whole new world of contacts and bonding will work. There will be new ways of being in touch – and families can embark on it together.
We are already making plans. We are firming up our online contacts. Some of us need to brush up our tech skills: I’m one of them, new to Skype, FaceTime and WhatsApp. But I know they will be important when I get gloomy and depressed. Our local networking group already has a list of volunteers standing ready to do the shopping. But questions remain: what about dental appointments, hairdressers, podiatrists? How will we manage to exercise if we are asked to stay indoors? I shall certainly be venturing out for a walk, alone and at a distance from others. I need a daily gulp of fresh air. It raises the question: how will the government’s “ask” for over-70s to stay indoors be policed?
Over the months, new ways of life will emerge. And we, the old, will do it for ourselves. We may well alight on new patterns of relating, coming together, sharing, that will survive the crisis, and make old age better.


Topics



Family




Shortcuts






Coronavirus outbreak




Infectious diseases




Older people




features






Share on Facebook






Share on Twitter






Share via Email






Share on LinkedIn






Share on Pinterest






Share on WhatsApp






Share on Messenger








Reuse this content




 