Covid-19 Mutual Aid: how to help vulnerable people near you

I’m worried about vulnerable people in my community who may have to self-isolate or quarantine, especially those who do not have family nearby. How can I help them?
Informal, local mutual aid groups are springing up all over the UK. Help could involve activities from running errands to the shops, to making phone calls, to providing a friendly voice of reassurance. Lots of existing local charities and community groups are putting in place plans to ramp up trained volunteer support.
Which groups need help in particular?
The idea is to support people who are self-isolating, especially people without nearby family, elderly people, and people with a disability or long-term health condition such as cancer, diabetes and chronic lung disease. Many people will feel anxious about coronavirus and local support groups can provide a vital boost to morale.
How do I find out about my local group?
An online group called Covid-19 Mutual Aid has a list of local groups on its website. Groups are being added all the time. These groups are autonomous and communicate online, through social media and email, and each will have its local priorities and focus.
There isn’t one for where I live. Can I set one up?
Covid-19 Mutual Aid recommends setting up a local group. It says the smaller the better – a group that brings together those people who live on your street alone could be more effective and manageable than a district-wide support group. The Covid-19 Mutual Aid website provides advice on how to set up a local group, including important guidance on safety and security.
Quick guide What to do if you have coronavirus symptoms in the UK  
 Show 
 Hide  

Symptoms are defined as either:
a high temperature - you feel hot to touch on your chest or back
a new continuous cough - this means you've started coughing repeatedly
NHS advice is that anyone with symptoms should stay at home for at least 7 days.
If you live with other people, they should stay at home for at least 14 days, to avoid spreading the infection outside the home.
After 14 days, anyone you live with who does not have symptoms can return to their normal routine. But, if anyone in your home gets symptoms, they should stay at home for 7 days from the day their symptoms start. Even if it means they're at home for longer than 14 days.
Information: If you live with someone who is 70 or over, has a long-term condition, is pregnant or has a weakened immune system, try to find somewhere else for them to stay for 14 days.
If you have to stay at home together, try to keep away from each other as much as possible.
After 7 days, if you no longer have a high temperature you can return to your normal routine.
If you still have a high temperature, stay at home until your temperature returns to normal.
If you still have a cough after 7 days, but your temperature is normal, you do not need to continue staying at home. A cough can last for several weeks after the infection has gone.
Source: NHS England on 18 March 2020




Was this helpful?







Thank you for your feedback.

Can I help if I am self-isolating?
Yes, so long as you are feel healthy enough. Help and assistance can be given over the phone or online.
What about the dangers of volunteers passing on the infection to vulnerable people, or being infected themselves?
The Covid-19 Mutual Aid website emphasises that all groups must prioritise safety. The aim is to prevent the spread of the virus. It provides guidance on how to provide help safely, from holding meetings online, and avoiding unnecessary face-to-face interactions.

Can I give money?
The idea of mutual aid groups is about helping people to self-mobilise to donate time and attention to local people. They are not set up to receive and handle donations. However, existing local charities that help the vulnerable are seeing a fall-off in donations due to fundraising events being cancelled and they would welcome financial support to keep vital services and trained volunteer networks going. These range from food banks (which will also need donated food), to homeless shelters, community kitchens and mental health and social care charities.


Topics



Coronavirus outbreak






Communities




Loneliness




Health




news






Share on Facebook






Share on Twitter






Share via Email






Share on LinkedIn






Share on Pinterest






Share on WhatsApp






Share on Messenger








Reuse this content




 