Hundreds of Canadians await evacuation flight from Wuhan

Hundreds of Canadians are anxiously awaiting evacuation from the Chinese city of Wuhan, the centre of the coronavirus outbreak, amid bureaucratic delays.
Canada announced late on Sunday that it had chartered an aircraft to evacuate 304 citizens from the city of Wuhan in the Hubei province.
All of the visas for crews have been approved, but the Canada is awaiting final approvals from Beijing, officials said on Monday.
Quick guide What are coronavirus symptoms and should I go to a doctor?  
 Show 
 Hide  


What is Covid-19?

It is caused by a member of the coronavirus family that has never been encountered before. Like other coronaviruses, it has come from animals.



What are the symptoms this coronavirus causes?

The virus can cause pneumonia-like symptoms. Those who have fallen ill are reported to suffer coughs, fever and breathing difficulties.
In the UK, the National Heath Service has defined the symptoms as:
a high temperature - you feel hot to touch on your chest or back
a new continuous cough - this means you've started coughing repeatedly



Should I go to the doctor if I have a cough?

Medical advice varies around the world - with many countries imposing travel bans and lockdowns to try and prevent the spread of the virus. In many place people are being told to stay at home rather than visit a doctor of hospital in person. Check with your local authorities.
In the UK, NHS advice is that anyone with symptoms should stay at home for at least 7 days. If you live with other people, they should stay at home for at least 14 days, to avoid spreading the infection outside the home.



Is the virus being transmitted from one person to another?

Yes. China’s national health commission confirmed human-to-human transmission in January.



How many people have been affected?

China’s national health commission confirmed human-to-human transmission in January. As of 19 March, more than 219,000 people have been infected in more than 150 countries, according to the Johns Hopkins University Center for Systems Science and Engineering.
There have been over 8,900 deaths globally. Just over 3,200 of those deaths have occurred in mainland China. Many of those who have died had underlying health conditions, which the coronavirus complicated.
More than 84,000 people are recorded as having recovered from the coronavirus.




Was this helpful?







Thank you for your feedback.

The plane will first land in Hanoi, Vietnam, and then travel onwards to Wuhan. Evacuees will be flown to the Trenton air force base in the province of Ontario, where they will be quarantined for a period of 14 days. Anyone showing symptoms of the virus will not be allowed to board the plane.
Canada has also secured access to a second plane if needed, the foreign minister, François-Philippe Champagne, said in a briefing on Monday.
The number of citizens requesting evacuation from China has climbed dramatically as the scope of infection also increases. Canada has said only citizens who entered China on Canadian passports will be permitted to board the plane, probably preventing permanent residents from leaving Wuhan.
There is no indication the delay in evacuating citizens is tied to the chilled diplomatic relations between Beijing and Ottawa, stemming from the extradition proceedings of a Chinese telecoms executive. Instead, the delay appears tied to a closure of airspace over the city of Wuhan, part of a mass quarantine of the region by Chinese officials.
The United States, Australia and the UK all evacuated citizens from the city last week. Japan is planning its fourth evacuation flight this week, its foreign ministry said on Sunday.
Q&A How can I protect myself and others from the coronavirus outbreak?  
 Show 
 Hide  
The World Health Organization is recommending that people take simple precautions to reduce exposure to and transmission of the coronavirus, for which there is no specific cure or vaccine.
The UN agency advises people to:
Frequently wash their hands with an alcohol-based hand rub or warm water and soap
Cover their mouth and nose with a flexed elbow or tissue when sneezing or coughing
Avoid close contact with anyone who has a fever or cough
Seek early medical help if they have a fever, cough and difficulty breathing, and share their travel history with healthcare providers
Many countries are now enforcing or recommending curfews or lockdowns. 
In the UK, NHS advice is that anyone with symptoms should stay at home for at least 7 days.
If you live with other people, they should stay at home for at least 14 days, to avoid spreading the infection outside the home.



Was this helpful?







Thank you for your feedback.

In a rare moment of praise, China’s foreign ministry lauded Canada’s decision not to place restrictions on Chinese residents entering the country.
“Canada believes the entry ban has no basis, which is a sharp contrast to the US behaviours,” spokesperson Hua Chunying said during an online press conference.
In contrast, the US and a number of other countries have advised against travel to China and banned entry by foreign citizens who have travelled to the country in the last 14 days.
There are currently more than 17,000 cases of the coronavirus worldwide. The vast majority of the 361 fatalities have been inside China, with only a single death in the Philippines on Sunday.
Canada has publicly said the risk to its citizens remains low. There have been four confirmed cases in the country, with the first case already released from hospital.


Topics



Canada






China




Coronavirus outbreak




Americas




Asia Pacific




Infectious diseases




news






Share on Facebook






Share on Twitter






Share via Email






Share on LinkedIn






Share on Pinterest






Share on WhatsApp






Share on Messenger








Reuse this content




 