Here's to fearless female trailblazers – podcasts of the week

Picks of the week
The Last BohemiansJournalist and broadcaster Kate Hutchinson’s podcast, which celebrates female trailblazers, returns for a welcome second series with a brilliant lineup. First up is folk great Judy Collins, who talks through her life from the Leonard Cohen years back in Greenwich Village through to the present day, via an aversion to acid, activism and how she is still gigging in her 80s. Next, Zandra Rhodes reflects on 50 years in fashion, and strong survivors PP Arnold and Maxine Sanders also appear, with the latter sharing stories about witchcraft in the 70s. Hannah Verdier
Mel Giedroyc Is Quilting



 ‘Soothing, slow TV-esque adventures’ ... Mel Giedroyc is Quilting. Photograph: Acast
No, it’s not a parody or euphemism: Mel Giedroyc is actually quilting. The TV host and comic, best known as one half of Mel and Sue, sits down with her radio presenter pal Andy Bush to assemble a blanket made out of everything from a much-hated shirt purloined from Giedroyc’s husband to fabric pinched from cafe curtains. Listeners can get involved by sending in their offcuts, but really the main draw is Giedroyc and Bush’s meandering chats and soothing, slow TV-esque adventures in crafting. Hannah J Davies
Producer pick: Poetry Unbound


 
 

 
 Facebook 
 
 Twitter 
 
 Pinterest 


 Lemn Sissay, author and broadcaster, and a recent guest on Poetry Unbound. Photograph: Christian Sinibaldi/The Guardian
Chosen by Max Sanderson
With everything going on in the world right now, there’s nothing like a little bit of escapism to help remove oneself, which is what Poetry Unbound offers in spades.
Brought to us by Krista Tippet et al (of On Being fame), this new offering - which aims to be “your new ritual” - is crisp, clean and simple. Guided by poet and theologian Pádraig Ó Tuama, each episode takes a single poem and reveals the meaning within, as interpreted through our host’s eyes. With each poem read once at the top and once at the end, the middle is filled with Ó Tuama’s interpretation and reaction and – upon the second listen – you are invited to come up with your own. The most recent episode with Lemn Sissay is an absolute treat.
Guardian Pick: Science Weekly Extra 

Science Weekly
Covid-19: where in the body does it infect us?

 Sorry your browser does not support audio - but you can download here and listen https://audio.guim.co.uk/2020/03/04-65068-gnl.sce.20200404.ms.covi19_where_does_it_infect_us.mp3 






00:00:00




00:10:17




As the coronavirus, or Covid-19, outbreak continues to unfold, we’ll be releasing extra episodes of Science Weekly exploring some of the biggest questions we have with experts on the frontline. In our first episode, Ian Sample investigates where the virus infects us when it enters our bodies, and what difference this makes to disease severity and transmissibility. If you have any questions you want us to explore, please email us: scienceweekly@guardian.com
Talking points
This week, Guardian Australia spoke to women broadcasting from inside a Darwin prison.
Why not try: Dying For Sex | Storycast: What Happened To Annie? | Power Corrupts


Topics



Podcasting




Hear Here






Television




Podcasts




features






Share on Facebook






Share on Twitter






Share via Email






Share on LinkedIn






Share on Pinterest






Share on WhatsApp






Share on Messenger








Reuse this content




 