Japan must prepare for possibility of Olympics being cancelled, says senior MP

A senior member of Japan’s governing party has said Tokyo 2020 Olympics organisers must plan for the possibility that this summer’s Games will be postponed or cancelled due to the coronavirus pandemic, as the city’s governor insisted they would go ahead as scheduled.
Shigeru Ishiba, a former defence minister who has been tipped as the country’s next leader, said any decision on the Games’ fate should be left to the International Olympic Committee [IOC], a day after an organising committee official suggested the Olympics could be postponed.
While he said cancellation was still “unlikely,” Ishiba called on Japan’s government to prepare for every possibility.
“Not thinking about worst-case scenarios won’t eliminate the risk of them materialising,” Ishiba told Reuters. “The government must start thinking now about what to do” in case the Games are postponed or cancelled, he added.



Coronavirus live updates: Trump suspends all travel from Europe to US for 30 days, excluding UK







Read more





His warning came as a rift appeared to be opening up among Olympic officials and senior politicians in Japan, where 620 cases of Covid-19 have been recorded, along with 12 deaths, according to the health ministry. Those figures exclude nearly 700 infections and seven deaths connected to the Diamond Princess cruise liner, which was quarantined at the Japanese port of Yokohama last month.
Tokyo’s governor, Yuriko Koike, said on Thursday that cancelling the Games, due to open on 24 July, would be “unthinkable,” but added that the World Health Organization’s decision to declare the outbreak a pandemic would have some impact on the event.
“It can’t be said that the announcement of a pandemic would have no impact ... but I think cancellation is unthinkable,” Koike told reporters, without explaining how the pandemic classification might affect the Games.
On Wednesday, Haruyuki Takahashi, a member of the Olympic organising committee’s executive board, angered colleagues when he suggested in a newspaper interview that postponing the Games by a year or two might be the “most feasible” option if the virus made it impossible to hold them this summer.



Coronavirus: global recession fears intensify as Trump's Europe ban fails to reassure







Read more





The organising committee’s chief, Yoshiro Mori, quickly dismissed Takahashi’s remarks as “outrageous”, adding that the Games would go ahead as scheduled.
Takahashi reportedly apologised for the comments, but again raised the prospect of major disruption to the Games when he said any decision on their future would have to be made before May – a timeline previously dismissed by Tokyo 2020 organisers.
Speaking to the TBS network after Mori had publicly rebuked him, Takahashi said: “If you think about the athletes, May would seem too late (to make a decision on any delay). We need to think about taking the first step, before the IOC.”
Takahashi said that the organising committee would probably discuss postponement at its next meeting later this month, TBS reported.
The coronavirus outbreak has already disrupted preparations. The the traditional flame-lighting ceremony in Olympia, Greece, is expected to be held without spectators, and an event to mark the torch’s arrival in Japan on 20 March will be scaled down.
Olympic qualifying tournaments in several different sports have also been cancelled, postponed or moved to different countries due to the outbreak.


Topics



Tokyo Olympic Games 2020






Japan




Olympic Games




Asia Pacific




news






Share on Facebook






Share on Twitter






Share via Email






Share on LinkedIn






Share on Pinterest






Share on WhatsApp






Share on Messenger








Reuse this content




 