Sarah Palin stuns TV viewers by rapping Baby Got Back dressed as a bear

Sarah Palin, a former Republican governor and running mate of 2008 presidential candidate John McCain, stunned Americans with an appearance on TV show The Masked Singer in which she rapped Baby Got Back while dressed as a furry bear.



John McCain opened Pandora’s box – Sarah Palin came out, but Trump was right behind her







Read more





The popular show involves mystery guests in elaborate costumes singing songs. Their identities are then revealed. Dressed as a bear, Palin had sung the hit song by Sir Mix-a-Lot, dancing around the stage and belting out the lyrics with gusto to a cheering crowd.
The revelation of the one-time conservative powerhouse as being the singer inside the purple and pink bear costume appeared to stun host Nick Cannon. “This might be the most shocked I’ve ever been on this show,” he said.
Palin explained her reasons for choosing the bear costume as being rooted in her image as a lover of the outdoors in her native Alaska.
“The bear is part of my nickname growing up and the whole ‘Mama Bear’ thing, and they’re in Alaska,” she said. “Bear was easy.”
Palin has been a controversial figure in American politics ever since she was tapped by McCain to be the person one heartbeat away from the presidency had he won the 2008 election.
Though McCain lost that contest to Barack Obama, it launched Palin’s career as a powerful figure on the American right whose populist style, mega-watt fame and blend of conservatism and reality show appearances have often been seen as foreshadowing the rise of Donald Trump.
The reaction of people on Twitter was generally one of amazement, especially in the middle of a news cycle devoted to the ongoing coronavirus crisis.
“Sarah Palin rapping ‘Baby Got Back’ on The Masked Singer with a fade into a Trump coronavirus update is the psychedelic dystopia we’re living in now,” tweeted writer and journalist Ashley Spencer.


Topics



Sarah Palin






US television




news






Share on Facebook






Share on Twitter






Share via Email






Share on LinkedIn






Share on Pinterest






Share on WhatsApp






Share on Messenger








Reuse this content




 