US briefing: Super Tuesday, Washington state deaths and Netanyahu

Good morning, I’m Tim Walker with today’s essential stories.
Buttigieg and Klobuchar join centrist rush to Biden
As 14 states prepare to vote in the Democratic primary on Super Tuesday, moderates have begun to unify behind Joe Biden as the candidate with the best chance of beating progressive frontrunner Bernie Sanders. Biden’s erstwhile rivals Pete Buttigieg, Amy Klobuchar and Beto O’Rourke all endorsed the former vice-president on Monday. Yet with Sanders consolidating crucial Latino support in Texas and California, his lead may soon be insurmountable.
Lost votes. Greg Palast says California’s arcane rules for independent party voters could deprive Sanders of hundreds of thousands of votes. Meanwhile, some four million Californians cast early ballots before Klobuchar and Buttigieg left the race; they won’t get a replacement pick.
Washington state at heart of US virus outbreak with 18 cases


 
 

 
 Facebook 
 
 Twitter 
 
 Pinterest 


 The nursing home Life Care Center of Kirkland near Seattle where there has been several cases of the coronavirus. Photograph: David Ryder/Reuters
At least six people have died as a result of the Covid-19 coronavirus in Kirkland, near Seattle, with Washington state health officials confirming another 12 cases of the disease – many linked to a nursing home in the area. As the threat of a major US outbreak grows, experts have expressed concern that the healthcare system is unprepared. South Korea has declared “war” on the virus with cases in the country nearing 5,000, while the chief of the WHO has warned the world is now in “uncharted territory”.
Grim prospects. European stock markets rebounded on Tuesday morning amid hopes of central bank intervention. But expert economic modelling of the crisis predicts a sharp hit to growth worldwide.
Coronavirus etiquette. Handshakes and cheek-kisses are out, elbow-bumps are in. Caroline Davies looks at how the virus is already altering our manners.
Netanyahu claims victory in Israeli election repeat


 
 

 
 Facebook 
 
 Twitter 
 
 Pinterest 


 Benjamin Netanyahu celebrates exit poll results pointing to a win for the incumbent prime minister. Photograph: Ariel Schalit/AP
Two weeks before his criminal trial for corruption, prime minister Benjamin Netanyahu has claimed victory in Israel’s third general election in less than 12 months. Netanyahu’s Likud party appears to have secured 36 seats, contributing to a total of 59 for the rightwing alliance headed by the country’s longest-serving leader. That puts him two seats short of an overall parliamentary majority, so he will need to entice rival politicians to join a coalition in order to secure a historic fifth term.
Blue and White. Partial results showed Likud’s leading opponents, the Blue and White party led by Benny Gantz, with 32 seats, while the Joint List alliance representing Israel’s Arab minority is now the third-largest party in the Knesset.
Husband of LA’s DA pulls gun on Black Lives Matter activists




Play Video





0:44





 Footage shows Jackie Lacey's husband pointing gun at protesters – video
The husband of the Los Angeles district attorney pulled a gun on Black Lives Matter activists protesting outside his home early on Monday morning, warning “I will shoot you”, video footage from the incident shows. David Lacey, whose wife Jackie Lacey is the city’s top prosecutor, told the demonstrators: “Get off of my porch. I will shoot you … I don’t care who you are … We’re calling the police right now.”
Tough on crime. Jackie Lacey, who is in the midst of a re-election fight, has long faced criticism for failing to prosecute LA police officers who kill civilians, as well as her other tough-on-crime strategies.
Cheat sheet
Russia has been accused of committing war crimes by indiscriminately bombing civilian areas in Syria, as part of a UN investigation into atrocities perpetrated during the conflict.
Chris Matthews, the veteran host of MSNBC’s Hardball, has abruptly announced his retirement, apologising for his past inappropriate comments about women and saying “a younger generation is ready to take the reins”.
Students at around a dozen US universities have taken part in protests against their schools’ proposed use of facial recognition technology on campus.
James Lipton, the actor and writer best known for hosting the long-running interview series Inside the Actors Studio, has died aged 93.
Must-reads


 
 

 
 Facebook 
 
 Twitter 
 
 Pinterest 


 Supporters of the Greek ultra-nationalist party Golden Dawn at a 2018 rally in Athens. Photograph: Angelos Tzortzinis/AFP/Getty Images
The rise and fall of Greece’s neo-Nazis
A decade ago, Greece’s Golden Dawn – a group of violent, racist neo-Nazis – elbowed their way into the country’s mainstream political scene by exploiting a national economic crisis. Now the party is crumbling under the weight of a sprawling criminal trial, but their success remains a warning for the rest of the world, writes Daniel Trilling.
The leftwing Texan running to unseat John Cornyn
AOC’s recently formed political action committee Courage to Change is backing six progressive women of colour in congressional races across the US. A seventh, Cristina Tzintzún Ramirez, has her eyes on a bigger prize, she tells Erum Salam: a Texas senate seat.
Joe Pera’s brilliantly boring comedy
His new series, Joe Pera Talks With You, showcases the small, beloved pleasures of a northern Michigan choir teacher. In a sea of toxic masculinity, says Laura Snapes, Pera cuts a benign figure – and his show is an antidote to the hysteria of modern life.
Meet the Hollywood super-networkers working to beat Trump
Hollywood is famously full of celebrity Democrats. But who are the behind-the-scenes networkers who can bring together Leonardo DiCaprio, Paris Hilton and executives from Snapchat to help raise millions in the fight to oust Trump in 2020? Peter Savodnik reports.
Opinion
From Russian bots claiming Covid-19 originated in a US lab, to US senators claiming it started as a Chinese bio-weapon, conspiracy theories about the disease are spreading faster than the coronavirus itself, says Scott Radnitz.




As the coronavirus spreads to new countries, governments have resorted to conspiracy theories to distract from their own failures or to pre-empt criticism.


Sport
The NBA has issued a list of tips to players on how to avoid contracting the coronavirus, by avoiding high-fives with fans or taking any items to autograph, in a memo sent to teams on Sunday.
Europe’s 55 national football associations will meet on Tuesday for the annual Uefa congress. With talk of an expanded Club World Cup and even a breakaway superleague, David Conn asks what the future holds for the organisation’s flagship competition, the Champions League.
Sign up
The US morning briefing is delivered to thousands of inboxes every weekday. If you’re not already signed up, subscribe now.


Sign up for the US morning briefing


Topics



Coronavirus outbreak




US morning briefing






Joe Biden




Benjamin Netanyahu




news






Share on Facebook






Share on Twitter






Share via Email






Share on LinkedIn






Share on Pinterest






Share on WhatsApp






Share on Messenger








Reuse this content




 