Complete shutdown of UK universities due to Covid-19 'impossible'

University vice-chancellors have told the government they cannot completely shut down if the coronavirus outbreak worsens because thousands of students would be left with nowhere to go.
The higher education regulator for England, the Office for Students (OfS), wrote to all universities on Monday, requesting ongoing information on the number of confirmed and suspected cases of the virus on campus, as well as details of how institutions are responding to them.
It is understood that any decisions about whether to instruct universities to close would be taken by the Department for Education (DfE). A spokesperson for the OfS said universities should “continue to follow advice from DfE and Public Health England”.
However, vice-chancellors cautioned that the makeup of universities made their complete shutdown impossible.
Q&A How can I protect myself and others from the coronavirus outbreak?  
 Show 
 Hide  
The World Health Organization is recommending that people take simple precautions to reduce exposure to and transmission of the coronavirus, for which there is no specific cure or vaccine.
The UN agency advises people to:
Frequently wash their hands with an alcohol-based hand rub or warm water and soap
Cover their mouth and nose with a flexed elbow or tissue when sneezing or coughing
Avoid close contact with anyone who has a fever or cough
Seek early medical help if they have a fever, cough and difficulty breathing, and share their travel history with healthcare providers
Many countries are now enforcing or recommending curfews or lockdowns. 
In the UK, NHS advice is that anyone with symptoms should stay at home for at least 7 days.
If you live with other people, they should stay at home for at least 14 days, to avoid spreading the infection outside the home.



Was this helpful?







Thank you for your feedback.

Prof Steve West, the vice-chancellor of the University of the West of England (UWE) in Bristol, said: “My bottom line back to government has been that they can’t treat universities like big schools because we aren’t. I’ve got 4,500 students living on campus: some of them are care leavers or estranged from their families and many are international students. We can’t just shut down as they would have nowhere to go.”
The vice-chancellor of a university in the elite Russell Group, who asked not to be named, agreed, saying: “We couldn’t fully close. What do you do with thousands of international students who can’t go home?”
The vice-chancellor said their university would provide free accommodation for international students who were stranded, even if the government told them to shut.
UWE has set up an emergency helpline for worried students and parents. West said: “We would operate something like a Christmas shutdown. The things you can shut down you do, such as lectures and sports. But you also have to provide vital support services for the students still here, including security, catering, wellbeing support and emergency phone lines.”

He added that universities may need to mobilise students who are training as nurses, doctors and other health professionals to help bolster voverstretched NHS services. “We need the flexibility to do that, and to support those students,” said West.
Harvard University in the US told students on Tuesday that they must move out of their houses and student residences by no later than Sunday and that all classes would be conducted online after the spring holiday, in an attempt to contain the spread of the infection. No cases have yet been detected at the university.
 Oxford University said it would remain open despite a second student testing positive for coronavirus. In a statement it said: “Public Health England has advised the university that the risk to other students and staff is very low and that university and college activities can continue as normal.”

Simon Marginson, a professor of higher education at Oxford, said the volume of people in universities represented a real challenge to containment: “Only transport and inner urban streets clearly exceed the level of people-traffic that we can see in large universities. The end of term cannot come too soon.”




Play Video





4:31





 How to stop the spread of coronavirus – video explainer


Topics



Universities






Coronavirus outbreak




Higher education




Infectious diseases




Biology




Health policy




Health




callout






Share on Facebook






Share on Twitter






Share via Email






Share on LinkedIn






Share on Pinterest






Share on WhatsApp






Share on Messenger








Reuse this content




 