Join our happy thread: things that bring a smile in these hellish times

We are all feeling anxious. Worried for loved ones, learning to cope with social distancing and beginning to consider how this pandemic will change our lives.



The Act of Love: using photography to spread unity during a pandemic







Read more





But while there is a temptation to stay glued to the news as each new update is rolled out, there is no doubt that we’re all in need of – and deserve – some joy.
Look no further: here are all of the things this week that have made us smile in these gloomy times. (Do the right thing and add yours in the comment thread, please!)
Penguins’ day out
In times of great need, animal videos should be state-mandated self-care. This video of penguins exploring a Chicago aquarium after it closed to the public is exactly that.

Evan McMurry 
(@evanmcmurry)
oh my god, the chicago aquarium closed due to coronavirus, so they let the penguins run around and check out the other exhibits. (staff was present.) pic.twitter.com/YGa8CugymE

March 16, 2020

If you think that’s cute, wait until you see them walking down stairs
Kudos to anyone who knew that a penguin would approach the stairs in this way.

your best friend 
(@SortaBad)
close your eyes. imagine how you think a penguin walks down stairs. wrong. it’s better than thatpic.twitter.com/fYzoiin5vb

March 17, 2020

A guy trying to escape quarantine this week came up with an unusual disguise
On Friday, Spain imposed a 15-day state of alarm that restricted free movement except for those traveling to work, to get food or health medication or for caregiving. This guy sneaking out of the house in a disguise may be irresponsible, but you have to applaud the effort.

E. R.R.E. 
(@Elire72)
 pic.twitter.com/Mvjovkzvw3

March 16, 2020

There is solidarity in isolation
This week two siblings from Columbus, Ohio, aged six and nine, decided to hold a spontaneous porch concert for their 78-year-old neighbor, after hearing she was voluntarily self-quarantining due to the pandemic. 

Jackie Borchardt 
(@JMBorchardt)
My elderly neighbor is self-isolating. So the neighbor kids are playing her a cello concert from her patio. pic.twitter.com/g6Nr2HNVho

March 16, 2020

We might get a new Cardi B song at the end of this
When Cardi B shared her fears over the coronavirus to Instagram last week, the clip immediately went viral . But she couldn’t have predicted that she’d end up charting on iTunes because of it. That’s exactly what happened, after an artist remixed her screeching: “Coronavirus! Coronavirus! Shit is getting real.” The result turned out to be pretty catchy.






 
 Facebook 
 
 Twitter 
 
 Pinterest 

This writer is risking it all just to make you laugh
“As a public service in these stressful times I’d like to offer, as a palate cleanser, the most embarrassing moment of my life,” began a 15-tweet thread by writer Anbara Salam this week.
 We’ll leave you to follow the detail.

Anbara Salam 
(@anbara_salam)
As a public service in these stressful times I'd like to offer, as a palate cleanser, the most embarrassing moment of my life.10ish years ago, my ex bf and I visited a spa in Germany. It's swimsuits in the pool but you have to be naked in the sauna. Btw I speak no German.  1/

March 16, 2020

For all the parents dealing with home-schooling right now
This video showcases just a few of the questions you might get from your children this week.

<U+2728>Just Bre<U+2728> 
(@ShesSoOffbeat)
I don’t have kids, but this has me wheezing <U+0001F602> pic.twitter.com/opL8X7nKWN

March 17, 2020

Italy’s balcony banter
As the rest of the world increasingly looks to Italy to understand what life under government-mandated quarantine might look like, there have been some unexpected revelations.
The first is that Italians are very good at singing and very good at balconies, but when you combine the two, it is magical.

Leonardo Carella 
(@leonardocarella)
Italians in lockdown all over Italy are keeping each other company by singing, dancing and playing music from the balconies. A thread to celebrate the resilience of ordinary people. This is Salerno: pic.twitter.com/3aOchqdEpn

March 13, 2020

A new meaning to working from home
But the prize from the category of “things we learnt about Italians in quarantine” this week has to go to this Italian DJ, who really gave a new meaning to “working from home” for those in quarantine.

Italian Football TV 
(@IFTVofficial)
Since noone in Italy can really leave their house...This DJ in Palermo is doing his work on his balcony <U+0001F923><U+0001F4FD><U+FE0F> FB/Salvatrice Lo Giudice pic.twitter.com/h7xOkUfz6W

March 14, 2020

Please send us in all the things you’ve found funny this week – we all need it.


Topics



Life and style






Coronavirus outbreak




features






Share on Facebook






Share on Twitter






Share via Email






Share on LinkedIn






Share on Pinterest






Share on WhatsApp






Share on Messenger








Reuse this content




 