UK supermarkets ration toilet paper to prevent stockpiling

British supermarkets trying to prevent shoppers from stockpiling have put purchase limits on items including pasta, anti-bacterial wipes, hand soap, toilet paper and children’s medications.
Shelves across the country have been stripped of such goods after Public Health England urged members of the public to “plan ahead” in case they had to self-isolate for a couple of weeks.
However, the government’s chief scientific adviser, Sir Patrick Vallance, has said there is “absolutely no reason” for the British public to panic-buy.



Coronavirus live updates: lockdown in Italy as death toll rises from 233 to 366







Read more





Tesco has almost sold out of its own-brand dried pasta and tinned tomatoes online and has now limited many high-demand items to five per shopper. Categories include long-life milk, bleach, dried pasta, tinned vegetables, children’s medications, water and anti-bacterial wipes, gels and sprays.
The restrictions apply both online and in stores. Customers have been told by the supermarket: “We know there’s demand for certain products at the moment and we’re working really hard to maintain availability of those to help customers. We’ve taken a commonsense approach to make sure everyone can access essentials.”
No other supermarket has yet resorted to rationing food, but the majority are limiting anti-bacterial gels to two per customer – if they have not sold out already.
Ocado, the online supermarket, was rationing toilet rolls on Sunday evening, with customers able to buy a maximum of two 12-roll packs of Andrex.
Commenting on reports of people panic-buying, Boris Johnson said on Sunday: “We’ve had no advice from the scientific advisers or medical officers that there’s any need for people to buy stuff in.” As of 10pm on Sunday, 278 people in the UK had been diagnosed with Covid-19, an increase of 69 from the 209 cases confirmed on Saturday. It represents the largest day-on-day increase in diagnoses. On Sunday evening it was announced a third patient had died in the UK of coronavirus.



Coronavirus map: how Covid-19 is spreading across the world







Read more





Coronavirus concerns appear to have created an international rush for toilet paper. Two women have been charged after a fight broke out over toilet roll in an Australian supermarket, a video of which was shared widely online.
One Asda customer complained that she had placed an online order for her elderly mother last Sunday, but that it had arrived on Saturday minus the toilet rolls.
Liberty Marketing found hand-sanitiser products were selling for more than 5,000% their recommended retail price online, with bottles worth 49p selling for £24.99. One eBay listing has sold a second-hand bottle of liquid soap for more than £5, despite being only three-quarters full.
The environment secretary, George Eustice, will meet food industry representatives on Monday.
A Department for the Environment, Food and Rural Affairs spokesperson said: “The environment secretary will hold a further call with chief executives from the UK’s leading supermarkets and industry representatives on 9 March to discuss their response to the coronavirus. The meeting will discuss support for vulnerable groups who may be in isolation.” 
• This article was amended on 13 March 2020 because an earlier version omitted to credit Liberty Marketing for its research into the price of hand-sanitiser products.



Topics



Coronavirus outbreak






Supermarkets




Infectious diseases




news






Share on Facebook






Share on Twitter






Share via Email






Share on LinkedIn






Share on Pinterest






Share on WhatsApp






Share on Messenger








Reuse this content




 