Coronavirus latest: 13 March at a glance

Key developments in the global coronavirus outbreak today include:
Global death toll surpasses 5,000
Both Johns Hopkins University and the Reuters news agency, which are keeping track of the virus’s spread, have put the death toll at more than 5,000 people. Each sources its information from official figures, so the true toll could be higher. According to the former, 137,445 cases have been confirmed globally, while 5,008 people have died and 69,779 people have recovered.
Europe is now the centre of the pandemic – WHO
The situation in Europe is now so severe that the continent must be considered the centre of the pandemic, according to the World Health Organization’s director general, Tedros Adhanom Ghebreyesus. He said Europe had now confirmed more cases and suffered more deaths than the rest of the world combined, apart from China.
UK cases rise by more than 200
The total number of cases increased to 798 after 208 more were confirmed by the Department of Health and Social Care. There have been 11 deaths so far from the virus in the UK, including the first in Scotland.
Sporting events suspended in UK
Professional football, including England’s Premier League, has been suspended. Matches due to take place in the Women’s Super League and English men’s football’s second, third and fourth tiers have also been postponed until 5 April, while the Scottish FA said all football under its jurisdiction would be suspended until further notice. Uefa also postponed all next week’s Champions League and Europa League fixtures. The London Marathon, which was due to take place in April, has been put back to October.
The Queen cancels engagements
Forthcoming visits to Cheshire and Camden, London, were cancelled. Buckingham Palace said the step was a “sensible precaution and for practical reasons in the current circumstances”.
British elections postponed
Votes for 118 councils in England and eight posts for directly elected mayors – including for the mayoralty of London – that were due to happen in May have been put back until next year, Downing Street said.
Brazil’s president tests positive
An initial test on Jair Bolsonaro came back positive, though his son cautioned against jumping to conclusions. Reports claimed the White House was to hold an emergency meeting on the diagnosis after Bolsonaro dined with Trump last week.
Spain declares a state of emergency
One of the worst affected nations in Europe became the latest to take such a step. As the death toll reached 120, the country’s prime minister, Pedro Sánchez, activated a part of the constitution that allows him to limit the movement of people and ration the consumption of basic items, among other measures.
Other European nations take drastic steps
No more than 100 people are allowed to gather in France after the country followed the more stringent steps being taken in other European nations. The prime minister, Edouard Philippe, said the ban would come into effect immediately.
In Switzerland, all schools were closed and the government pledged about 10bn Swiss francs in aid for businesses.
Trudeau says he has no symptoms
After his wife tested positive following a trip to the UK, the Canadian prime minister, Justin Trudeau, said he had no symptoms of the coronavirus and that he was feeling good. Sophie Grégoire Trudeau plans to remain in isolation for the next two weeks. Her symptoms were described as mild.


Topics



Coronavirus outbreak




Coronavirus: at a glance






news






Share on Facebook






Share on Twitter






Share via Email






Share on LinkedIn






Share on Pinterest






Share on WhatsApp






Share on Messenger








Reuse this content




 