Beyond Bargain Hunt: your definitive guide to 'the wonderland' of daytime TV

So, you have found yourself working from home. As a 15-year veteran of the art, let me assure you that things will be fine. After a few weeks of routine-free drifting, you’ll snap into shape and find a practical division between your work and the rest of your life. But until then: daytime telly.
For many of you, daytime television will be a wonderland that you haven’t experienced since school. This will pass, and it will pass extremely quickly. However, just to expedite things a little, I have taken it upon myself to present you with a rundown of what to expect on a typical day.
BBC One


 
 

 
 Facebook 
 
 Twitter 
 
 Pinterest 


 Doctors … the Joe Pasquale episode. Photograph: BBC
The BBC One daytime schedule exists to pummel two messages into viewers. One: your house is full of valuable things that should be sold to the highest bidder; two: the world is cruel and full of people determined to rip you off. The first category includes shows such as the hardy old warhorse Bargain Hunt, in which people buy rubbish at a market and sell it for pennies more, and Money for Nothing, in which scrapheap items are lovingly upcycled and sold. The second category includes things such as Crimewatch Roadshow, in which we are warned about scammers and fly-tippers, and a show called Claimed and Shamed, which is about insurance and disability fraud. On the plus side, there is also Doctors. An episode last week was about a woman who thought all white men were Joe Pasquale. It was excellent.
BBC Two
Quick question: what is the very, very last thing you want to watch as a distraction at the moment? If your answer is “the news”, then bad luck. BBC Two’s daytime schedule is extraordinarily news-heavy. At 9am there is the news. At 10am there is Victoria Derbyshire’s news programme. Then there’s another hour of news. Then there’s 45 minutes of political news. After that, it reverts to the usual daytime staples of cookery and interior design, but by that point you’ll be too bummed out about the looming apocalypse to enjoy it.
ITV
If you’re worried that your self-isolation will remove you from the cultural conversation, then stay abreast of all the most important issues with ITV’s daytime output. It begins with Piers Morgan honking about nothing on Good Morning Britain. It then segues nicely into This Morning, which at this point is just a slightly fluffier-than-usual version of The Jerry Springer Show, where the hosts collapse into 10-minute-long giggle fits whenever anyone says the word “gusset”. And after that, it’s Loose Women, in which a panel of women are barely able to keep a lid on their utter revulsion for one another for 45 minutes. Then you’ll be treated to hours and hours of too-elaborate gameshows.
Channel 4


 
 

 
 Facebook 
 
 Twitter 
 
 Pinterest 


 Frasier … still listening. Photograph: Getty Images
Morning: Frasier, Undercover Boss and a Gordon Ramsay show. Afternoon: Countdown, a Place in the Sun, Four in a Bed and Come Dine With Me. This has been the formula for years now, and you would think that it would have started to feel old. And yet, pound for pound, this may be the best lineup of them all. It’s an all-star collection of shows let down only by its utter lack of topicality. Then again, who wouldn’t want to feel as they were preserved in amber right now?
Channel 5
Forget most of Channel 5’s daytime output because it’s just Jeremy Vine, Australian soaps and shows called things like Britain’s Parking Hell. But at about 2pm every day, the channel comes into its own with a genuinely terrible thriller movie. Yesterday, it was Forbidden Secrets, about a woman plagued with troubling visions. Tomorrow, it’s Black Widow, about a woman who discovers that her teacher has a troubling secret. On Thursday, it’s The Wrong Son, about a woman who makes a troubling discovery about a man she thought had drowned. You get the idea. They’re amazing.
The rest


 
 

 
 Facebook 
 
 Twitter 
 
 Pinterest 


 Brooklyn Nine-Nine … if it’s your thing, you’re in luck. Photograph: NBC
The good thing about digital channels is that they just repeat everything 10 times a day. So E4’s daytime is Brooklyn Nine-Nine and The Big Bang Theory repeats, Dave is Top Gear repeats, Quest has lots of fishing shows and Blaze has tons of Storage Wars. The one exception, of course, is CBeebies. CBeebies will save your arse a million times a day after the schools close. Make friends with it.
Streaming
All the shows you would normally watch in the evening, available all the time for ever. This is probably what you’ll watch, and potentially why your boss will end up firing you by email.


Topics



Television






Daytime TV




features






Share on Facebook






Share on Twitter






Share via Email






Share on LinkedIn






Share on Pinterest






Share on WhatsApp






Share on Messenger








Reuse this content




 