Thursday briefing: Brexit 'sets back economy for decade'

Top story: Johnson’s plan will only have modest impact
Good morning – Warren Murray here. I hope you enjoy today’s briefing.
Boris Johnson would need two full terms as prime minister to fulfil his pledge to “level up” the British economy in the wake of Brexit, according to the National Institute of Economic and Social Research. In a warning before next month’s budget, Britain’s oldest economic thinktank says the government’s plan to raise investment in infrastructure projects by about £20bn a year can have only a modest impact on the UK’s dismal productivity levels. Johnson has pledged to invest in new transport projects and other large public works but NIESR says the positive impact on the economy will be less than 0.5% of GDP over the long run, compared with an estimated 3-4% cost of Brexit.
In a blow to the chancellor, NIESR says Sajid Javid will fall short of achieving his growth target of 2.8% per year while his new budget rules will probably be trashed by public spending at the levels promised in the election campaign. The Bank of England has already warned that Brexit will strike a blow to British productivity as higher trade barriers harm efficiency gains, while growth can only run at 1.1% on average until 2023 without driving up inflation. The number of new homes registered to be built in the UK in 2019 rose to 161,022 – the highest in 13 years – but it remains well below the government’s target of 300,000 a year by 2025.
Death of screen colossus – Kirk Douglas, the last great star of Hollywood’s golden age, has died at the age of 103. Michael Douglas announced the news in a statement last night. “To the world, he was a legend, an actor from the golden age of movies who lived well into his golden years,” the statement said. “But to me and my brothers Joel and Peter he was simply Dad, to Catherine, a wonderful father-in-law, to his grandchildren and great grandchild their loving grandfather, and to his wife Anne, a wonderful husband.”




Play Video





1:04





 Hollywood legend Kirk Douglas: his most memorable roles – video
Born Issur Danielovitch Demsky to impoverished Russian-Jewish immigrants, Douglas went on as an actor to earn a reputation as a tough customer – both on screen and off – known for his rugged handsomeness. His production company, Bryna Productions, developed two of his arguably greatest pictures: Paths of Glory and Spartacus, both directed by Stanley Kubrick. Revisit some of his career in clips.
Trump survives on party lines – Donald Trump’s entirely expected acquittal was nonetheless a moment of gravity, whatever his claims of exoneration, David Smith writes. Mitt Romney, the onetime presidential candidate, proved the only Republican in the Senate (which they control) to vote for the president’s dismissal, explaining: “Corrupting an election to keep oneself in office is perhaps the most abusive and destructive violation of one’s oath of office that I can imagine.” Nancy Pelosi emphasised that while not removed, Trump would remain “impeached forever”. Smith, our bureau chief in DC, notes that Trump’s latest Gallup poll approval rating stands at 49% – the highest since he took office and better than Bill Clinton or Barack Obama at this stage in their re-election years: “Somehow he is becoming stronger rather than weaker.”
‘Scourge on us all’ – A record number of 1,805 antisemitic incidents were logged in the UK in 2019, the fourth year in a row figures have hit an all-time high, according to monitoring group the Community Security Trust (CST). Eighty per cent involved abusive behaviour, such as verbal abuse, graffiti or abuse via social media. Robert Jenrick, the communities secretary, said that 75 years after the end of the Holocaust the figure was a “scourge on us all”. Almost half of antisemitic violent assaults were in Barnet and Hackney in London, and Salford in the north-west. David Delew, the CST’s chief executive, said: “It is clear that both social media and mainstream politics are places where antisemitism and racism need to be driven out, if things are to improve in the future.”
Newborn has coronavirus – The death toll from coronavirus has risen to at least 563, as Chinese media reported that a baby had been diagnosed with the virus 30 hours after birth, the youngest case recorded so far. The baby’s mother had tested positive before giving birth. More than 28,000 people have been infected globally. Martin Farrer writes that Hong Kong’s economy, already hit by civil unrest, risks being plunged deeper into recession as the coronavirus outbreak wreaks havoc, with consumers panic-buying staple goods and airlines stopping flights. The territory’s chief executive, Carrie Lam, has stepped up preventative measures, with all people entering from the mainland to be required to undergo 14 days of quarantine. In mainland China, police are flying around drones that shout at people not wearing masks to go home and get one – this and other updates at our live blog.
Not so choice – Sellers on Amazon are gaming the system to get an “Amazon Choice” badge on their products regardless of whether the item is actually any good, research by Which? has found. The label is given out automatically based on reviews, price, shipping and other factors. If unscrupulous sellers are able to generate good reviews for mediocre, unsuitable or dangerous products, they can succeed in getting their items the coveted label, Which? says. It found a car dashcam had at least 24 written reviews mentioning the offer of a free SD card in exchange for a positive review; while a pair of wireless headphones had close to 2,000 reviews that, via a feature called “product merging”, were about unrelated products including acne cream and razor blades.
Today in Focus podcast: Will HS2 really benefit the north?
As the government prepares to give the green light to a new high-speed rail line between London, Birmingham, Manchester and Leeds, Helen Pidd looks at the dire state of transport links in the north of England. Plus: Annabel Dixon argues that Britain should follow the lead of other European countries on assisted dying legislation.

Today in Focus
What will HS2 deliver for the north?

 Sorry your browser does not support audio - but you can download here and listen https://audio.guim.co.uk/2020/02/05-71359-200206TIFHS2.mp3 






00:00:00




00:37:17




Lunchtime read: Inside the mind of Dominic Cummings
“He is now the country’s de facto project manager, but what does he actually believe?” asks Stefan Collini who, in a bid to find out, read (almost) everything Boris Johnson’s special adviser Dominic Cummings has written in the last decade.


 
 

 
 Facebook 
 
 Twitter 
 
 Pinterest 


 Illustration: Jim Stoten
Sport
The deal to sell a 15% stake in the Six Nations to the private equity company CVC is being held up over the home unions’ insistence that the tournament should remain live on terrestrial television, the Guardian has learned. England have lit the fuse under the Calcutta Cup match on Saturday by promising a war against Scotland and highlighting their hatred for their old rivals. Super League clubs have unanimously agreed plans that will give them greater authority to veto controversial signings in an effort to draw a line under the furore surrounding Catalans Dragons’ recruitment of Israel Folau.
Son Heung-min’s late penalty completed Tottenham’s FA Cup comeback against Southampton as they set up a home fifth-round tie with Norwich. Big-name WSL recruit Sam Kerr has admitted she has been confronted with a testing start to life with Chelsea. Just days after World Athletics belatedly introduced regulations to limit running shoe technology, Nike has courted further controversy with one that slips inside the rules and then hailing it as another “gamechanger”. England may have lost the first one-day international emphatically in Cape Town, but Chris Jordan is adamant a make-do-and-mend bowling attack can show the bite that characterised the World Cup winning XI. A senior Olympic official in Japan has warned that the coronavirus outbreak could “throw cold water” on preparations for Tokyo 2020, although organisers insist that there are no plans to cancel the Games. And the Red Bull principal, Christian Horner, believes Max Verstappen is the driver most likely to challenge Lewis Hamilton for the Formula One world championship this year.
Business
Asian markets were up strongly on hopes that the coronavirus disruption will be temporary and that central bank intervention across Asia will neuter any negative impacts. One of the big drivers of global markets is the US tech sector and our financial columnist Nils Pratley has been kicking the tyres on Tesla’s phenomenal doubling of its share price this year. The FTSE100 is set to jump 0.6% at the opening bell and the pound is on $1.298 and €1.18.
The papers
The Guardian splashes with our exclusive: “Police uncover ‘epidemic’ of child sexual abuse from 1970s and 80s”. Thousands of allegations have led to convictions of hundreds of offenders, including teachers, religious workers, youth and care workers who thought they had got away with their crimes. Labour says Boris Johnson should apologise to victims for claiming in 2019 that inquiries into non-recent sexual abuse amount to “spaffing money up the wall” .


 
 

 
 Facebook 
 
 Twitter 
 
 Pinterest 


 Guardian front page, Thursday 6 February 2020.
Trump is prominent on a number of fronts, but mostly just as the main picture, turning to details inside, rather than as the lead story. The i is an exception, splashing with “Trump survives impeachment to stand for four more years”. The Telegraph has “Social media bosses face duty of care prosecution”, with heads of companies to be put on the hook for online harms. The Times has “Cancer code offers hope of treatment decades early” – here’s our own report on this potentially game-changing research.
“Swap Duke for ‘killer’ driver” reports the Metro, on a call to hand over Prince Andrew to the US in exchange for Anne Sacoolas, the suspect in the road death of Harry Dunn. The Mail is on the Harry Dunn story as well with a picture of Anne Sacoolas filling up her car: “The fugitive – and she’s still behind the wheel”. The Sun exclaims “Union Joke!” as town halls are asked to fly flags for the Duke of York’s 60th birthday. The Mirror has “Queen paid off my mortgage for saving Princess Anne’s life”, about Ronnie Russell, now 72, who intervened in the 1974 London attempted kidnapping drama. The FT goes with “Investors give Thiam upper hand in Credit Suisse power struggle”, about a struggle between the CEO and the chairman over which of them should lose their job.
Sign up

The Guardian Morning Briefing is delivered to thousands of inboxes bright and early every weekday. If you are not already receiving it by email, you can sign up here.
For more news: www.theguardian.com

Topics



Guardian morning briefing








Share on Facebook






Share on Twitter






Share via Email






Share on LinkedIn






Share on Pinterest






Share on WhatsApp






Share on Messenger








Reuse this content




 