Prince Harry, you've been pranked! Or is the joke on us?

I was a remarkably strange, earnest, rule-abiding 10-year-old, so when we received a prank call to the house once, I didn’t immediately realise it was happening. I don’t think it hit me that it was a prank until I was deep into my 20s. I assumed that the voice on the other end of the phone asking, “Is your washing machine running?” was a representative of Hotpoint making a legitimate follow-up survey call after a vaguely recent purchase. I had to walk all the way downstairs to find my mum, who it turns out was in the bathroom, to ask her. I knocked on the door.
“What?”
“Is the washing machine running?”
“What? I can’t hear you.”
“IS THE WASHING MACHINE –”
“Yeah?”
“– RUNNING?”
“Who wants to know?”
“Man on the phone.”
“A man on the phone wants to know about our washing machine?”
“Yeah.”
“Well tell him ‘Yes’ then!”
“OK.”
Then I trudged all the way upstairs again, to someone who had set out two minutes ago to make a harmless prank call and was now frantically coining 20p pieces into a public phone box to hear how this saga ended, and picked up the phone. “She says yes,” I said, dutifully, and then, with the expectation of generations behind him, with a breath held for hours before him in anticipation, with the raw earthly power of the wind itself, he shouted: “WELL BEST GET RUNNING AFTER IT THEN!” and hung up. I was utterly, thoroughly owned.
Solidarity, then, with the Artist Formerly Known As Prince Harry, who, it emerged this week, was allegedly the victim of a prank phone call from Russia’s Ant and Dec equivalent, Vovan and Lexus (Vladimir Kuznetsov and Alexey Stolyarov). Actually, I suspect they are possibly more like Russia’s JK & Joel. Anyway, they somehow duped him into thinking he was on a conference call with Greta Thunberg and her father, Svante, twice over Christmas and New Year. The calls were released online this week and, honestly, they are … fine? They are less embarrassing than interrogating your mum about white goods, as a random example.
Here a few selected excerpts. President Donald Trump has “blood on his hands” due to his continuing tubthumping of the US coal industry. Getting married into the royal family is “not all it’s made out to be”. Boris Johnson is a “good man, so you are one of few people who can reach into his soul and get him to feel and believe in you”. On the Sussexes having a private jet habit: “Unfortunately, there are very few alternatives”. On Prince Andrew having a private jet habit: “I have very little to say on that. But whatever he has done or hasn’t done is completely separate from me and my wife.” He rounded the phone call out by saying: “I was in the military for 10 years, so I’m more normal than my family would like to believe.” Which I think is pushing it a bit. There are literally four career paths available to former members of the British army – bullish Apprentice contestant; murderer; hidden homeless ignored by the government; and Nervous Man At Public Fireworks Display. Harry has about a week and a half to decide which of them he is going to take up.
Read the headlines on Harry taking a phone call in good faith from a prominent climate activist and proceeding to have a mild conversation that was so watertight it could’ve run on The One Show as a “bit” and you would see it as an enormous “Gotcha!” That Harry – who dared to leave a royal family he was never going to be the king of simply because existence within its ancient structures is deeply horrible – was a spoilt brat who, seconds after announcing his exit, let the artifice slip and started blabbing family secrets to anyone who could reach his incredibly secure line at his safe house in Canada. Or you might see it as an agenda pushed by a media that got chided by the same man for aggressively pushing a witch-hunt against his wife: I don’t know. The cynic in me, though – the one born the second he put that phone down as a child, who in that moment learned never to believe anything again – thinks this is all an act.
Think about it. Harry has left the royal family to a mixed response (you fall into one of two camps: you either think leaving an ancient institution on mental health and limelight-pressure grounds into a life of guaranteed wealth and family bliss is a good idea, or you Extremely Care About Whether The Taxpayer Still Funds His Security Detail). He needs a PR win. What better way to woo the young, hip, always-online crowd than by speaking their language, of YouTube pranks, diplomatic “see all sides” opinions about world leaders, sincere wife-guy expressions of love and all the right noises about the climate crisis? Being pranked by Russians was arguably the best thing he could have done for his career at this point.
My only fear is that this will result in the remaining members of the royal family trying to get in on the “speaking the language of online” trend, in a bid to out-Harry Harry. William tries to do the Say So TikTok dance in front of an assembly full of year 6 children, or something. Kate Middleton does a lacklustre smoky-eye beauty tutorial. Prince Charles makes one of those vile Instagram cooking videos which consists of just his knobbly hands seen holding a tray of Duchy of Cornwall butter to melt it over an induction hob and then mixing it with ribboned hotdogs. Prince Andrew gets caught slowly licking his lips on Chaturbate. It’s a perilous new era for Britain’s favourite family. Let’s see where they go with it.
Tom’s not tripping
Tom Hanks and his wife, Rita Wilson, have become the first A-list celebrities to test positive for coronavirus. You have to assume there are various Hollywood-adjacent WhatsApp groups currently seething about this news: it’s just so Tom Hanks of Tom Hanks to be the guy to get coronavirus, isn’t it? First he has an entire career of impeccable award-winning acting. Then he is universally embraced as the ultimate nice guy, like one of those footballers who somehow goes their whole career without a single yellow card. And now he gets to be the first big coronavirus scalp while filming an Elvis biopic in Australia. That is just … so Hanksian, isn’t it? He probably got it after too-close contact with an infected typewriter. Tom Hanks never stops being Tom Hanks, even for one second.

All the more odd, then, that his son Chet announced the news with a topless Instagram video in which Chet appears huge, hulking and tattooed like the back of a dollar bill, the leg day-skipping gym receptionist who ghosts you to end all other leg day-skipping gym receptionists who ghost you. He leads with: “What’s up everyone, uh, yeah, uh, it’s true my parents got coronavirus. Crazy.”
If you are unfamiliar with Chet Hanks, I must urge you to swim deep down the rabbit hole of him over your next month of self-isolation: as a human being, he is fascinating; as the direct descendant of the world’s nicest man, he is doubly so; as an example of how mind-bending it must be to grow up the son of one of the planet’s most famous actors, he is a cautionary tale.
He last made headlines for dropping a bizarrely competent patois accent at the Golden Globes (I won’t transcribe the whole thing, but “Big up, big up the whole island massive, it’s your boy Chet coming straight from the Golden Globes” features heavily). And now he is dropping Tom Hanks Health Updates in the form of Instagram thirst traps. I am obsessed. “I just got off the phone with them,” Chet concluded. “They both are fine, they’re not even that sick. They’re not worried about it, they’re not tripping, but they’re going through the necessary health precautions, obviously.” Guys, please don’t worry. Tom Hanks is not tripping. But if you are worried about him, please slide into Chet Hanks’s DMs, where you will be welcomed warmly.


Topics



Monarchy




Lost in showbiz






Prince Harry




Celebrity




Meghan, Duchess of Sussex




Tom Hanks




Coronavirus outbreak




features






Share on Facebook






Share on Twitter






Share via Email






Share on LinkedIn






Share on Pinterest






Share on WhatsApp






Share on Messenger








Reuse this content




 