Six Nations: Rescheduling set to hand England busy autumn

England may have to play five Tests in consecutive weeks in the autumn, with the Six Nations organisers considering rescheduling postponed matches for 31 October. The Guardian understands that the weekend before the November internationals has been discussed as a possible new date for postponed matches as Saturday’s fixture between France and Ireland became the third to be called off because of the coronavirus outbreak on Monday.
Ireland were due to play Les Bleus in Paris on Saturday but the French sports minister, Roxana Maracineanu, confirmed the match would be postponed after a crackdown on public gatherings of more than 1,000 people was announced in France on Sunday. The Six Nations confirmed that Wales v Scotland is still due to go ahead as planned, as Saturday’s only fixture with organisers now facing the headache of rescheduling three matches.



'No reason' yet for UK sport to go behind closed doors, says culture secretary







Read more





While organisers insist that no dates have yet been finalised and while the unpredictability of the virus means the tournament may yet be washed out, the weekend at the end of October is considered a logical choice given it falls between the end of a European double-header and the start of the November Tests. As England have four autumn matches scheduled, there is less flexibility over their fixture against Italy in Rome and if it were played on 31 October, France v Ireland could take place on the same day. That would not solve the issue of when Italy’s trip to Dublin takes place, however, and there appears no guarantee it would be before the other two rescheduled matches. Indeed, while England play Australia on 28 November, neither Italy nor Ireland have matches on that weekend so it is conceivable the tournament would not reach a conclusion until then.
The Ireland head coach, Andy Farrell, admitted his side were “gutted” after having a second postponement confirmed on Monday but revealed they were “very open” to rescheduling for the autumn. Whereas England and Wales have arranged four autumn internationals this year, Ireland have only three – against Australia, South Africa and Japan. “We’ve got a window for that,” he said. “Some teams, they always schedule four [games] in there but we’ve scheduled three in November so we’ve got a window there so we’re very open for that.”
England are slated to play New Zealand, Argentina, Tonga and the Wallabies in consecutive weeks but adding the Italy fixture to the start of that fixture list could raise concerns over player welfare. When World Rugby proposed the Nations Championship last year it was strongly opposed on welfare grounds by the international players’ union. At the time, the Ireland fly-half, Johnny Sexton, said: “To suggest that players can play five incredibly high-level Test matches in consecutive weeks in November is out of touch and shows little understanding of the physical strain this brings.”
Scotland’s trip to Wales will go ahead this weekend after the government insisted there was no reason yet to cancel sporting events or play them behind closed doors. Wales women v Scotland women has been postponed however, with seven members of the Scotland squad self-isolating after a player was diagnosed with coronavirus before their match against France last weekend, which was postponed as a result.
The Rugby Football Union chief executive, Bill Sweeney, had earlier indicated Wales v Scotland would be going ahead when he spoke as he left a Department of Culture, Media and Sport meeting in London. Sporting bodies such as the RFU are under instruction from the government to strictly follow medical advice rather than adopt their own approaches, hence England’s public rebuke for not picking Mako Vunipola last week because of a brief stopover in Hong Kong, only for Saracens to select him in accordance with guidelines from Public Health England.


The Breakdown: sign up and get our weekly rugby union email.
European Champions Cup organisers have said that all quarter-finals, scheduled for the first weekend of April, are currently still due to go ahead though Clermont’s all-French affair against Racing 92 and Ulster’s trip to Toulouse are likely to be behind closed doors. 


Topics



Six Nations 2020






Six Nations




Ireland rugby union team




France rugby union team




Rugby union




news






Share on Facebook






Share on Twitter






Share via Email






Share on LinkedIn






Share on Pinterest






Share on WhatsApp






Share on Messenger








Reuse this content




 