Send a tip on a wildlife reserve in the UK for the chance to win £200 towards a Sawday's stay

As with all attractions, some wildlife reserves may be closed during the coronavirus outbreak. Please recommend your favourites with a view to informing readers; we are not seeking to promote outings in the near future that may pose any health risk.
The UK is blessed with wonderful nature reserves managed by the RSPB, wildlife trusts, local authorities and the National Trust (free-to-enter sites should still be open; check online). You may be a keen birdwatcher or more into amphibians, reptiles, flora or invertebrates. Whatever your level of expertise – even if you just love a stroll in beautiful surroundings – please share details of your favourite protected areas. Include any special sightings you may have experienced.
Please tell us exact locations, website and entry fee where appropriate. Feel free to mention any particularly good facilities on site. Please ensure your tip stays around 100 words.
We’re looking for UK entries only this week please.
Have a look at our past winners and other tips
We’re sorry, but for legal reasons you must be a UK resident to enter this competition.
Photographs are very welcome if they are high-quality (at least 700 pixels wide please) and you are happy to share them but it is the text that our judges will consider. If you do send photographs please ensure you are the copyright holder.
The prize is £200 for a stay at a Sawday’s property – the company has more than 3,000 in the UK or Europe. The winner will be chosen by Tom Hall of Lonely Planet.
The best tips will appear on the Guardian Travel website and may also appear in print in Guardian Travel.
The competition closes on Tuesday 24 March at 10am GMT


 
 

 
 Facebook 
 
 Twitter 
 
 Pinterest 


If you’re having trouble using the form, click here. Read terms of service here.
Read the terms and conditions


Topics



Travel




Readers' travel tips






competitions






Share on Facebook






Share on Twitter






Share via Email






Share on LinkedIn






Share on Pinterest






Share on WhatsApp






Share on Messenger








Reuse this content




 