The week in radio: Your Call; The Emma Barnett Show; The Archers

Your Call (Radio 5 Live) | BBC SoundsThe Emma Barnett Show (Radio 5 Live) | BBC SoundsThe Archers (Radio 4) | BBC Sounds
Live radio is always the best medium in a crisis. If you want to know what’s going on, tune to 5 Live, LBC or your local radio station. Rolling news, expert opinion, plus listener reaction and listeners’ questions are often surprising and insightful.
So this week I’ve been listening to Your Call, with Rachel Burden, and to Emma Barnett, both on 5 Live, as well as LBC’s Nick Ferrari (a bit) and James O’Brien. On Tuesday, with coronavirus doing what a virus does, meaning going viral, the on-air chat was of little else. And although everyone kept insisting that we should just follow governmental advice, the calls from listeners to Your Call revealed how confused people are. Should a listener with sciatica stop taking her immune-suppressant medication? (No, she should take it.) Should someone who’s been to Basel in Switzerland and has a few mild symptoms go to work? (No, stay home and call 111, because then you will be logged somewhere on the NHS system, so that if you do get ill, you have a contact.) So said Dr Frank Ryan, a virus specialist who didn’t seem to agree with governmental advice about very much at all. The BBC has rushed out a coronavirus podcast on Sounds, by the way, which includes this show.
On Wednesday morning, with the news that Nadine Dorries had tested positive for the virus, Barnett welcomed the Labour MP Rachael Maskell, who’d recently had a meeting with Dorries and so, after calling 111, decided to self-isolate. Maskell stays with her sister when working as an MP in London, she said. Barnett, always alert to detail, pounced. How was that working? Maskell has “created a barrier”, she said. “How have you done this?” wondered Barnett, and we discovered that Maskell was, essentially, sitting in her bedroom, texting, calling and using her computer, only emerging to use the bathroom and, possibly, make cheese on toast. Listener Steve wondered if Maskell was getting full pay or sick pay, but she confessed she hadn’t even asked as yet.
Later, we got the budget, which was the usual shouting and sneering fest. Why were MPs going to the Houses of Parliament at all, wondered many 5 Live listeners, given that one of them had tested positive? Why couldn’t they all just stay at home and listen to the radio for the chancellor’s speech? “We’d take it wherever Rishi Sunak was,” agreed Barnett. “We’d just link up the mics.” If unnecessary gatherings are to be cancelled for health reasons, I do hope that parliament leads by example. All MPs should immediately self-isolate in their bedrooms, eat delivery pizza and attempt a spot of online work, before getting distracted by the internet, spraying around some disinfectant and spending three hours bitching about the state of the world on social media. Finally, they’ll start to understand the youth of today.
Or they could catch up on The Archers, which has gone tonto this week. Not a peep about Covid-19, but a surprise explosion at Grey Gables, which took out Lynda Snell (oh no!) and a random builder called Blake.
A soil pipe was leaking under the kitchen floor, throwing the country hotel into some disarray: Fallon had to send over some emergency quiche. Philip agreed to have some of his builder lads sort out the kitchen – his son, Gavin, was one of them – and something must have gone wrong because the whole place exploded, just as Tracy was having a heart to heart withEmma about Emma divorcing Ed Grundy, and Lynda was telling the builders to stop making so much noise.


 
 

 
 Facebook 
 
 Twitter 
 
 Pinterest 


 The beating heart of Ambridge… Carole Boyd as Lynda Snell in The Archers. Photograph: BBC/Gary Moyes
The explosion was a genuine shock. No foreshadowing, nothing to indicate it might happen: such is the way of unplanned explosions, I suppose. Silly Freddie Pargetter, who had spent the previous episode being cross with Lynda (it happens), ended up being trapped beneath the rubble with her, and had to try and drag her out, poor lad. Lynda said nothing at all: this did not bode well.
Tuesday’s episode, in the hospital, was very well done. Robert, Lynda’s husband, was in bits, with Jim trying to talk him down: beautiful acting from Graham Blockey and John Rowe. And Freddie’s talk to his auntie Shula (Toby Laurence and Judy Bennett) was also very moving: he didn’t save Lynda, he said, he’d given up. “The fire was right by her feet.”
Lynda Snell, played by Carole Boyd, is an immensely popular Archers character – a meddling busybody, a know-all snob – and I do hope she’s OK. But with a collapsed lung, fractured pelvis and “full-thickness burns”, it doesn’t sound good. If coronavirus brings too many infectious patients into Borchester General, Lynda may well be a goner. Which would be, for many Archers listeners, the absolute end.
Three great apocalyptic podcasts
War of the WorldsOrson Welles’s wireless dramatisation of HG Wells’s The War of the Worlds famously caused widespread panic across the US after it was broadcast one evening in 1938. The wonderful Radiolab celebrated this event in one of its live episodes, and it’s a lovely listen, as always. We get the facts – only around 1 in 12 people actually panicked when they heard it; we hear from those who believed it; and we also get consideration of whether such a broadcasting event could happen again. “It’s the way that the story unfolded, step by step by step,” says presenter Jad Abumrad…
We’re Alive/GoldrushWe’re Alive, one of the best and earliest drama podcasts, ran from 2009-14, and is considered the gold standard of contemporary apocalypse shows. It’s a full-on zombie affair, set in downtown Los Angeles, and there are 143 episodes, so you’re in for a nice long binge-listen, if you happen to be stuck indoors for a long time. Plus, the company that made We’re Alive has just put out a 10-part follow-up, Goldrush, set 17 years after We’re Alive’s main events. We’re Alive is an imaginative teenagers’ dream and nightmare rolled into one. Perfect for these crazy days.
Ash TalesA fairly recent podcast, Ash Tales is a story show: we hear new short fiction about the end of the world, nicely narrated by presenter Ryan Law, with each episode coming in under 20 minutes. It’s a spin-off from Ash Tales’s main website, which showcases new writing about various end-of-the-world scenarios: super plagues, nuclear disasters, you know the stuff. It could perhaps do with a different narrator from time to time, and some added audio atmosphere, but the stories are great and this is a small, interesting British show that’s worth supporting.


Topics



Radio




Miranda Sawyer on podcasts and radio






Radio 5 Live




The Archers




Podcasts




Radio 4




Coronavirus outbreak




reviews






Share on Facebook






Share on Twitter






Share via Email






Share on LinkedIn






Share on Pinterest






Share on WhatsApp






Share on Messenger








Reuse this content




 