Local elections could be delayed by coronavirus outbreak

Government lawyers are assessing the possibility of delaying the local authority, mayoral and police and crime commissioner elections in May if the coronavirus outbreak continues to escalate, the Guardian can disclose.
Matt Hancock, the health secretary, said on Sunday the government was considering all options, from closing schools to isolating entire cities if Covid-19 became a pandemic. He said ministers would publish a plan this week to explain how they may tackle such an event.
An email sent to board members of the Association of Police and Crime Commissioners on Saturday by its chief executive, Susannah Hancock, reveals that these measures would also include potentially delaying the forthcoming elections.
She said that the Home Office, in discussions with the Cabinet Office, had sought legal advice on postponing the elections.
Q&A How can I protect myself and others from the coronavirus outbreak?  
 Show 
 Hide  
The World Health Organization is recommending that people take simple precautions to reduce exposure to and transmission of the coronavirus, for which there is no specific cure or vaccine.
The UN agency advises people to:
Frequently wash their hands with an alcohol-based hand rub or warm water and soap
Cover their mouth and nose with a flexed elbow or tissue when sneezing or coughing
Avoid close contact with anyone who has a fever or cough
Seek early medical help if they have a fever, cough and difficulty breathing, and share their travel history with healthcare providers
Many countries are now enforcing or recommending curfews or lockdowns. 
In the UK, NHS advice is that anyone with symptoms should stay at home for at least 7 days.
If you live with other people, they should stay at home for at least 14 days, to avoid spreading the infection outside the home.



Was this helpful?







Thank you for your feedback.

“We have had a number of inquiries today regarding the PCC elections, coronavirus and whether the May PCC and local elections will take place,” the email reads.
“I have spoken with the Home Office and they are currently liaising with Cabinet Office to understand their latest thinking and planning on this.” The Home Office “are also engaging lawyers at their end to understand how things could proceed and what if any primary legislation might be needed etc”.
She added that the Home Office would keep the APCC updated and that police and crime commissioners would be briefed soon.
“We can get further information out to PCCs once we have more info next week, but I wanted to let you know the latest and that work is in hand.”
The local elections are due to be held on Thursday 7 May. About 118 English councils will be contested, along with eight directly elected mayors in England and 40 police and crime commissioners in England and Wales.
Quick guide What are coronavirus symptoms and should I go to a doctor?  
 Show 
 Hide  


What is Covid-19?

It is caused by a member of the coronavirus family that has never been encountered before. Like other coronaviruses, it has come from animals.



What are the symptoms this coronavirus causes?

The virus can cause pneumonia-like symptoms. Those who have fallen ill are reported to suffer coughs, fever and breathing difficulties.
In the UK, the National Heath Service has defined the symptoms as:
a high temperature - you feel hot to touch on your chest or back
a new continuous cough - this means you've started coughing repeatedly



Should I go to the doctor if I have a cough?

Medical advice varies around the world - with many countries imposing travel bans and lockdowns to try and prevent the spread of the virus. In many place people are being told to stay at home rather than visit a doctor of hospital in person. Check with your local authorities.
In the UK, NHS advice is that anyone with symptoms should stay at home for at least 7 days. If you live with other people, they should stay at home for at least 14 days, to avoid spreading the infection outside the home.



Is the virus being transmitted from one person to another?

Yes. China’s national health commission confirmed human-to-human transmission in January.



How many people have been affected?

China’s national health commission confirmed human-to-human transmission in January. As of 19 March, more than 219,000 people have been infected in more than 150 countries, according to the Johns Hopkins University Center for Systems Science and Engineering.
There have been over 8,900 deaths globally. Just over 3,200 of those deaths have occurred in mainland China. Many of those who have died had underlying health conditions, which the coronavirus complicated.
More than 84,000 people are recorded as having recovered from the coronavirus.




Was this helpful?







Thank you for your feedback.

In 2001, the local elections were delayed because of the foot and mouth epidemic, the first delay to local elections since the second world war, as more than 6 million sheep, cattle and pigs were slaughtered to contain the outbreak.
A government spokesperson said the UK was “extremely well prepared for these types of outbreaks” but would not comment directly on the plans to assess the possibility of delaying the elections.
“We are continuing to work closely across government, with the World Health Organization and the international community as the outbreak develops to ensure we are ready for all eventualities,” they said.
An Electoral Commission spokesperson said: “The commission and the electoral community are working hard to ensure that the scheduled May elections can go ahead as planned, as well as monitoring the developing issue of the coronavirus and its potential impact.
“Any changes to the date of May’s polls would be a matter for the UK government and parliament. In the event of any changes to the date, we would work with the electoral community to minimise any potential disruption.”



Topics



Coronavirus outbreak






Local elections




Mayoral elections




Matt Hancock




Infectious diseases




Medical research




Microbiology




news






Share on Facebook






Share on Twitter






Share via Email






Share on LinkedIn






Share on Pinterest






Share on WhatsApp






Share on Messenger








Reuse this content




 