US briefing: Trump acquitted, Iowa caucus fallout and Kirk Douglas

Good morning, I’m Tim Walker with today’s essential stories.
Trump claims ‘full exoneration’, but Romney makes history
Donald Trump has claimed “full vindication and exoneration” after his acquittal by the Senate on both articles of impeachment: a vote that was predictable but nonetheless weighty in its implications, further fanning the flames of what David Smith describes as the most profound national split since at least the Vietnam war. Tom McCarthy looks at how Trump’s defenders closed ranks around the president.
Mitt won’t acquit. Donald Trump Jr has called for Mitt Romney to be expelled from the GOP after the former presidential nominee became the first senator in US history to vote to remove a president of his own party.
After Iowa shambles, Democrats decamp to New Hampshire


 
 

 
 Facebook 
 
 Twitter 
 
 Pinterest 


 Is the Democratic race now a contest between Pete Buttigieg and Bernie Sanders? Photograph: Andrew Harnik/AP
Following the chaos of the Iowa caucuses, the Democratic presidential field has regrouped in New Hampshire, which is due to hold its primary next Tuesday. As the last of the Iowa results trickled in, Bernie Sanders appeared to have closed the gap with Pete Buttigieg to a near tie. Sanders also maintains a healthy poll lead in New Hampshire, but Buttigieg is looking to leverage his success in Iowa as the contest moves on to the Granite State.
Joe Biden. The former US vice-president, who came in fourth behind Elizabeth Warren, admitted on Wednesday that his campaign “took a gut punch in Iowa”. In fact, he added, “the whole process took a gut punch”.
Trump 2020. The president’s acquittal appears to leave him, and other Republicans, in a more powerful position going into the 2020 campaign, writes Adam Gabbatt. But observers say the Democrats had no choice but to impeach him.
Politics blog. Today’s blog is up and running. Read it here.
Coronavirus deaths at 563 as newborn is youngest infected


 
 

 
 Facebook 
 
 Twitter 
 
 Pinterest 


 Coronavirus patients at a temporary hospital in Wuhan, China. Photograph: Barcroft Media/Barcroft Media via Getty Images
Chinese authorities said on Thursday that the country’s coronavirus death toll had risen by 73 to 563 in the previous 24 hours, the third record daily rise in a row. All but three of the new cases were in Hubei province, where the outbreak originated. A 30-hour-old baby became the youngest patient diagnosed with the virus, while 10 more cases were reported onboard a quarantined cruise ship off the coast of Japan. Health experts have warned that the official number of cases – at least 25,000 – may be the tip of the iceberg.
China tariffs. China has said it will halve additional tariffs on 1,717 US goods as part of the phase 1 trade deal between Beijing and Washington, a move analysts interpreted as an effort to boost confidence amid the coronavirus crisis.
Tokyo Olympics. A senior Japanese Olympics official has warned that the outbreak could “throw cold water” on preparations for the Games, which are due to begin in less than 170 days.
He was Spartacus: Kirk Douglas dead at 103




Play Video





1:04





 Hollywood legend Kirk Douglas: his most memorable roles – video
Kirk Douglas, the square-jawed star of Spartacus and Paths of Glory, known as the last surviving great of Hollywood’s Golden Age, has died at the age of 103. His son, the Oscar-winning actor Michael Douglas, announced the news on Instagram on Wednesday, saying Kirk “leaves a legacy in film that will endure for generations to come”. Born Issur Danielovitch, the son of a Russian-Jewish “ragman”, Douglas was, writes the Guardian’s Peter Bradshaw, “impossibly handsome” and “inimitably dimpled”.
A career in clips. Andrew Pulver looks back on Douglas’s career with extracts from several of his most celebrated performances, including The Bad and the Beautiful, Lust for Life and The Heroes of Telemark.
Cheat sheet
At least 10 American oil refineries are emitting more cancer-causing benzene than the limit set by the US government, according to a new report by the Environmental Integrity Project.
The US justice department has opened an investigation into a spate of deaths at four Mississippi state prisons, where at least 15 inmates have died since late December.
The White House has warned it is planning “crippling” new measures against Venezuela’s Maduro regime, after Trump met with the country’s opposition leader, Juan Guaidó, in Washington on Wednesday.
California has issued a permit allowing Uber to join dozens of other tech companies in testing self-driving vehicles on the state’s roads, for the first time since the ride-share giant paused its self-driving program following a fatal accident in March 2018.
Must-reads


 
 

 
 Facebook 
 
 Twitter 
 
 Pinterest 


 Corey Feldman: ‘Nobody wants to go after the bad guys.’ Photograph: Jessica Pons/The Guardian
Corey Feldman: ‘Hollywood’s biggest problem is paedophilia’
The surviving half of the two Coreys says he and his best friend, Corey Haim, were sexually abused as child stars. But he is still struggling to release a documentary he has made about his claims. “Nobody wants to go after the bad guys,” he tells Hadley Freeman.
Migration stories that ‘honor immigrants’, chosen by writers
If there is a silver lining to the ill-fated release of the new novel American Dirt, it is the opportunity to promote other stories that more accurately reflect the migrant and refugee experience. The Guardian asked writers to compile an alternative reading list.
Why ride-share drivers are also at risk of violence
If you pick up enough strangers, sooner or later, an unfortunate incident will unfold, writes Rene Chun. Which is why some Uber and Lyft drivers are adding safety features to their cars – and carrying nunchucks – to protect themselves from violence.
What growing a ‘crisis beard’ represents
Beto O’Rourke and Ted Cruz may not have a lot in common, but both men grew beards as a public display of a personal change. From David Letterman to Justin Trudeau, Priya Elan examines the phenomenon of the so-called “crisis beard”.
Opinion
Trump’s acquittal is a reminder of the fragility of American democracy, writes Andrew Gawthorpe. And with this president’s crimes going unpunished, his successors will be emboldened to behave similarly.




The slow creep of authoritarian rule need not be dramatic. It can even, as impeachment seemed at times, be rather boring. Democracy can die by inches, with precedents being established and barriers swept away so gradually that we don’t see what is happening until it is too late.


Sport
Days after World Athletics chose not to ban Nike’s Vaporfly running shoes, the company has stirred further controversy by unveiling a new trainer, the Air Zoom Alphafly Next%, which falls just inside the governing body’s new rules – despite being, in Nike’s description, a “gamechanger”.
Barcelona is in meltdown amid a standoff between the Catalan club’s sporting director and its star player, Lionel Messi – whose contract allows him to walk away at the end of the La Liga season. Sid Lowe reports on the crisis at Camp Nou.
Sign up
The US morning briefing is delivered to thousands of inboxes every weekday. If you’re not already signed up, subscribe now.


Sign up for the US morning briefing


Topics







US morning briefing






news






Share on Facebook






Share on Twitter






Share via Email






Share on LinkedIn






Share on Pinterest






Share on WhatsApp






Share on Messenger








Reuse this content




 