PGA Tour will pay even bigger bucks to fend off Premier Golf League threat

The world might be heading for economic crisis as the impact of the coronavirus hits home but the PGA Tour has presented a picture of sharp financial growth. Jay Monahan, its commissioner, has revealed a plan to increase the Players Championship prize fund to $25m and the FedEx Cup bonus pool to $100m.
This week at Sawgrass the Players Championship carries a purse of $15m (£11.5m). The FedEx aggregate, where the winner collects $10m, is at $60m. The Tour has been keen to see off the threat offered by the proposed breakaway Premier Golf League (PGL), with Monahan’s hand boosted by a new long-term broadcast deal confirmed on Monday.



Tyrrell Hatton holds off Rory McIlroy on challenging day at Bay Hill







Read more





“Here we were excited to move to a $15m purse, I see us getting to $25m,” Monahan said. “There’s a day in the not too distant future where the [FedEx] Cup will be worth significantly more, perhaps $100m or more. That’s not a commitment but that’s generally speaking the kind of growth that I expected for us to see for our athletes.”
Monahan also praised the “leadership” of Rory McIlroy, who spoke out last month against the PGL plan. McIlroy said: “I think at this point I have somewhat of a responsibility, not just for myself but for the other players. I’ve been around the top of the game for a long time now, over a decade, and am at the stage of life where I’m a lot more comfortable in my own skin and in my own beliefs and values and convictions. I guess I want to be a voice out there that can at least put forth some good commentary and a decent opinion on things, and that’s what I try to do.”
Monahan would not rule out the PGA Championship, scheduled for 14 May at Harding Park in San Francisco – which has temporarily limited public gatherings – switching to Sawgrass because of concerns over the virus. The PGA of America, as presides over the year’s second major, claims “no such discussions” have taken place but Sawgrass in Florida has been widely talked about as an alternative.
“They are fully planning on proceeding with the PGA Championship at TPC Harding Park in San Francisco,” he added. “But when you get in these extraordinary circumstances you have to make yourself available to your partners, and you have to really work as closely together as you ever have to help each other get through this.”


Topics



Golf






US PGA




PGA Tour




US sports




news






Share on Facebook






Share on Twitter






Share via Email






Share on LinkedIn






Share on Pinterest






Share on WhatsApp






Share on Messenger








Reuse this content




 