Saturday Night Live: John Mulaney and David Byrne fire up a strong show

Saturday Night Live returns from a short hiatus in time to catch up with the White House’s inept handling of the coronavirus outbreak. Despite not believing in science, Mike Pence (Beck Bennett) is taking charge of the task force.



Saturday Night Live: RuPaul teaches the art of drag but episode doesn't slay







Read more





The VP attempts to field questions from reporters, only to be interrupted by the Democratic candidates, who turn the press conference into an impromptu debate. 
Charisma vacuum Mike Bloomberg (Fred Armisen) tries to present himself as a trustworthy leader in a time of crisis, only for Elizabeth Warren – “fifth in the polls but No1 in Bloomberg’s nightmares” – to slam him. Joe Biden (John Mulaney), fresh off a huge victory in “South Cracker Barrell”, rambles about “China cough”, Nelson Mandela and Ebola monkeys, while Bernie Sanders (Larry David) starts out making a pitch for universal healthcare but ends up singing the praises of Joseph Stalin. Hangers-on Pete Buttigieg (Colin Jost) and Amy Klobuchar (Rachel Dratch) pop in just to snipe.
For the most part, the sketch is as low-energy as Armisen’s Bloomberg (as well as Jost’s Buttigieg – if the former mayor of South Bend had any chance of sticking around much longer I’d say they really need to get someone else to play him), flailing about while trying to catch up on two weeks of political news. That said, David and Mulaney are great, salvaging what they can.
Mulaney, a former SNL writer and current comedy superstar, hosts for the third time. He apologizes to anyone who doesn’t know who he is before jumping right into a new standup routine, covering topics such as baby boomer dads (“All of our dads are cramming for some world war two quiz show”); politics (“When I was a boy the United States was like Michael Jordan in 1992, and now the United States is like Michael Jordan now”); and meeting a fan through the Make-a-Wish foundation. (“Lin-Manuel Miranda was my first choice!”)
He and Cecily Strong then play the romantic leads in The Sound of Music. Despite their chemistry, she’s put off by the difference in their ages (she’s 17 and he, despite riding a bike and living with his mother, is somewhere in his 40s) and his obvious Nazi sympathies. It’s a solid musical sketch, albeit one that’s likely to land better with those familiar with the film.

Saturday Night Live - SNL 
(@nbcsnl)
...did you meme your uncle, Tyler? #SNL pic.twitter.com/SgKsBE4f94

March 1, 2020

Next, a suburban family gathering goes off the rails when Mulaney’s middle-aged uncle accuses his college-aged nephew (Pete Davidson) of “memeing” him by sharing a goofy picture across Reddit, where users add text such as “When You Tip The Cam Girl 10K And She Block You”, “When Green Book On HBO” and “That Feeling When You A Pedophile”. No one is as good as Mulaney at playing befuddled white squares.
Tired of being typecast as a loser nerd in sketches written by Mulaney, Kyle Mooney beefs up with the help of a nutritionist and fitness instructor (Justin Theroux, playing himself). His grotesquely swollen physique impresses his fellow cast members and even Lorne Michaels but not Mulaney, who promptly fires him.
A new episode of the 50s soap Say, Those Two Don’t Seem to Like Each Other sees rival sisters (Kate McKinnon and Aidy Bryant) once again vying for the affection of a visiting admiral. Last time, their efforts were thwarted by their sexy third sister (Jennifer Lopez) but this time it’s their baby brother Julian (Mulaney), recently returned from the navy where he’s earned a reputation as “pass around party bottom” that sends the admiral into a fit of lust. This bit is much improved from the last time, thanks mostly to Mulaney’s oblivious twink.

Saturday Night Live - SNL 
(@nbcsnl)
<U+0001D5DB><U+0001D5F2><U+0001D5F9><U+0001D5F9><U+0001D5FC><U+0001D5FC><U+0001D5FC><U+0001D5FC>, <U+0001D600><U+0001D5EE><U+0001D5F6><U+0001D5F9><U+0001D5FC><U+0001D5FF>. #SNL pic.twitter.com/eQxc5uHMq1

March 1, 2020

The night’s musical guest is David Byrne. Alternately stumbling around the stage under a giant spotlight and being propped up by his dancing back-up band, he performs the Talking Heads classic Once in a Lifetime. It’s a delightfully theatrical performance of the type for which Byrne is famous and SNL’s most ambitious and interesting musical act in recent memory.
On Weekend Update, Colin Jost voices his doubts over Donald Trump’s ability to lead the nation through the coronavirus outbreak: “Hoping Trump can calm people down is like hoping cocaine can cure insomnia.” Michael Che, worried that this could be it for all of us, breaks down and starts drinking on air while questioning his life choices. The hosts ought to try stuff like this more often, as it’s a good change of pace.
They’re joined by Chris Redd, there to talk about how this Black History Month has been a bad one, what with the lack of black presidential candidates, boxer Deontay Wilder being literally “licked while getting his ass beat” by Tyson Fury, and the garish pictures from Trump’s recent roundtable with African American supporters. They should have Redd on more often.

Saturday Night Live - SNL 
(@nbcsnl)
"You're buying sushi at LaGuardia Airport?" #SNL pic.twitter.com/ANoiGJ2n2R

March 1, 2020

A sequel to the popular Bodega Man musical number from Mulaney’s last time hosting, Phantom of LaGuardia is a big, show-stopping Broadway extravaganza about New York’s notoriously unpleasant “third world” airport, including parodies of Phantom of the Opera, West Side Story, Annie and Wicked. Byrne and Jake Gyllenhaal, both of whom popped up in the recent Netflix special John Mulaney & the Sack Lunch Bunch, lend their musical talents. It manages to actually eclipse Bodega Man, which is no small feat.



Saturday Night Live: JJ Watt hosts but like the Senate it’s all a bit of a trial







Read more





Byrne and his troupe return, barefoot, to perform Toe Jam. Then the final sketch is Forgotten Figures of Black History, which covers Terrence Washington, the “first black man to boo Jackie Robinson”. It’s a simple, funny premise but it can’t hope to live up to the previous numbers. But then, nothing could.
Much like fellow three-timer Adam Driver, Mulaney is as reliable a host as the show has these days, guaranteed to deliver a great monologue and at least one show-stopping sketch, raising the standard with his mere presence. Combined with Byrne’s fabulous interludes, this episode stands alongside Driver and Eddie Murphy as the best of the season so far.


Topics



Saturday Night Live




Saturday Night Live recap






US television




Television




TV comedy




Comedy




reviews






Share on Facebook






Share on Twitter






Share via Email






Share on LinkedIn






Share on Pinterest






Share on WhatsApp






Share on Messenger








Reuse this content




 