Gregor Townsend says red card was not decisive in Scotland's win over France

Gregor Townsend insisted that Mohamed Haouas’s first-half red card was not the determining factor in Scotland’s 28-10 victory over France. The Scotland coach said that the visitors had responded well to the setback and that his own squad deserved credit for their physical commitment.
“Obviously it is important, but I thought we played better in the first half than the second,” Townsend said of the tighthead prop’s dismissal for a punch on Jamie Ritchie. “We had France on the back foot and we turned them over nine times in the first half in the way we defended, and we had opportunities getting in behind them.



Scotland make France pay for Mohammed Haouas punch and red card







Read more





“Sometimes a red card can really help you, but I felt France coped with being one man down in terms of how they worked the set piece. Who knows? If you have a one-man advantage it’s better than having the same numbers. But I thought we played really well when it was 15 against 15, and the weather was more of a factor in the last 20 minutes,” he added, referring to the rain.
Having expressed his pride in Scotland’s performance, Townsend acknowledged they will have to raise their game against Wales on Saturday if they are to make it three wins in a row. “We just have to go down there and show the fight and consistency we have shown here,” he said, “but also a little bit more quality and learn from our game today to take that to another level. Wales are a very good side.”
The tournament has already been affected by the coronavirus, and the Scotland coach acknowledged that the game could yet be postponed: “Six days, a lot can change. We hope the game will go ahead, but the decision will obviously be made for the right reasons.”
Fabien Galthié, meanwhile, shared his counterpart’s assessment that the red card did not fully explain how the match worked out. “Our discipline cost us today,” said the France coach.
“We didn’t produce our best first half in terms of intensity – I’m not sure why. We were well prepared though, perhaps even better than normal. It’s tough to say the main reason why we lost. We’ve failed in controlling our emotions and need to do this better in the future.”


The Breakdown: sign up and get our weekly rugby union email.


Topics



Six Nations 2020






Scotland rugby union team




France rugby union team




Six Nations




Rugby union




news






Share on Facebook






Share on Twitter






Share via Email






Share on LinkedIn






Share on Pinterest






Share on WhatsApp






Share on Messenger








Reuse this content




 