There’s no one else I’d rather be with on Valentine’s Day – just don’t expect any romance | Emma Beddington

It’s nearly Valentine’s Day, with its tenuous promotions and panicked Moonpig orders. I note that Marks & Spencer has revived last year’s horrifying heart-shaped Love Sausage, presumably because we, as a nation, no longer deserve nice things.
I get a head start on this stuff, because my wedding anniversary falls a week before V-Day. I confess we are not excessively romantic about it: February is usually when my husband disappears for a budget adventure holiday on which I refuse to join him. Meanwhile, quizzed by a civic official recently, I had to take off my wedding ring to check when we got hitched (it’s engraved in there – not our idea, obviously). Sometimes I think wistfully of champagne and roses, but then I remember champagne gives me gut rot and I have destroyed his romantic impulses with my weirdly rigid definition of what flowers are acceptable (definitely not roses).
This year’s celebration started with a romantic trip to purchase a new salad spinner. Later we bickered about local planning applications and compared heated clothes rails online, each on our own laptops. After a stodgy dinner à deux, we watched a documentary about Whitney Houston’s drug-fuelled demise. Then, a surprise: a laconic message from our teenaged son, at a party: “Funny story, I’ve hit my head.” A rainy drive, a kind stranger’s house, then that romantic staple: A&E at midnight.
There was an odd romance to it, actually. Sure, the strip lighting, the promised six-hour wait on the whiteboard, the hushed huddled masses don’t immediately scream hearts and flowers. Nor do kidney-shaped cardboard bowls, coronavirus warnings and a well-oiled man in a wheelchair singing about how you can break your ankle “just from walking if you’re drunk enough”. But it gave me time to reflect on all those years: all the minor and major dramas, humdrum weekends and WhatsApp bin squabbles that make up our shared life. There’s no one else I want at my side in an emergency department, or in any emergency, come to that. Also, this year’s traditional anniversary gift is apparently “iron” and there was a lot of blood. 


Topics



Valentine's Day




Opinion






Relationships




comment






Share on Facebook






Share on Twitter






Share via Email






Share on LinkedIn






Share on Pinterest






Share on WhatsApp






Share on Messenger








Reuse this content




 