Crossword blog: Crossword Council #1 – the carrollism

How does a device – running one word backwards to find another, say – become part of the cryptic toolkit?
There’s seldom a definitive record of which setter first tried out some device. And these things tend to evolve as other setters get in on the act: we’re not like the French language, with an Academy laying down the rules.
But what if we pretended that we were?
In our cluing competition for SNEEZE, Peter Moore Fuller proposes this wordplay:




… ‘a sniff and a wheeze’ wrote Carroll


In other words, we are acting as if an answer in the puzzle was created by Lewis Carroll, who was fond of inventing words by bolting together bits of existing ones: if something is miserable as well as flimsy, we can now, thanks to Carroll, describe it as “mimsy”.
As Peter points out, this is not unlike the spoonerism (which we take a look at here): not only is the answer produced by mangling other words, but the device is indicated by the name of the author.
How should the Crossword Council rule on this?
Well, this imaginary body values kindness to the solver above all else. So the carrollism gets marks immediately for making itself obvious to the solver through the presence of the word “Carroll” (although it seems likely that setters will be tempted to use “wrote the deacon” in the same way that some disguise their spoonerisms with “the reverend’s” and the like).
And the words that need to be carrollised? In some cryptic devices, the setter must give the exact word that needs to be played with: for the answer CARNIVOROUS, he or she can put “outbreak of coronavirus”, but not “nasty disease”. Other times, the fodder can be hinted at …




14d So long to Spooner’s dog-end? (6-3)


… such as when Qaos asks you to dream up “poodle-tip” en route to TOODLE-PIP. How should it be for the carrollism? Peter’s sample clue gives you exactly the words needed (“sniff” and “wheeze”): fairer, but too constricting?
The final item on the council’s agenda is to do with sounds. Would it be good form to clue RENO by “rendezvous with casino, wrote Carroll”, or is the difference between “eno” and “ino” a dealbreaker?
Council is now in session. If you enjoy this not-100% serious exercise, we could before long take a look at this habit of taking the letters in positions indicated by prime numbers.


Topics



Crosswords




Crossword blog






features






Share on Facebook






Share on Twitter






Share via Email






Share on LinkedIn






Share on Pinterest






Share on WhatsApp






Share on Messenger








Reuse this content




 