Coronavirus 9 March: at a glance

Key developments in the global coronavirus outbreak:
Global death toll nears 4,000 
More than 110,000 cases have been recorded worldwide, according to the Johns Hopkins University Center for Systems Science and Engineering, which has also counted 3,892 deaths – an increase of nearly 500 over the weekend. There have been 111,400 cases and more than 62,000 people have recovered, the centre has said.
Markets continue to tumble
Global markets suffered their worst day since the 2008 crisis, while trading was briefly suspended in New York over coronavirus fears. The S&P 500 index plunged by 7% at the Wall Street open, which triggered automatic circuit-breakers to let investors catch their breath. The FTSE 100 leading index of shares plunged more than 8% in early trading.
Fifth coronavirus death confirmed in UK
The country’s health secretary, Matt Hancock, told the House of Commons 319 cases had been confirmed as of Monday morning (GMT) and it was announced that a fourth and a fifth victim had died.
UK still trying to contain the outbreak
Boris Johnson said the country was still in the “contain phase of the outbreak” and was not preparing to move to the delay phase – the third part of the government’s four-part action plan.
Spread will become ‘quite fast’ – UK government adviser
The UK government’s chief medical adviser, Prof Chris Whitty, said the virus would soon be spreading “really quite fast” and that, within 10 to 14 days, the government would advise people with even minor respiratory tract infections to self-isolate.
Germany confirms first death
The country had identified 1,153 cases by 2pm (CET), as well as the first death of a person infected with the virus. Germany’s health minister, Jens Spahn, appealed to citizens to travel as little as they could, to work from home when possible, and to contact doctors by telephone in cases where the virus was suspected.
WHO warns over lack of protective gear
Dr Michael Ryan, executive director of the organisation’s health emergencies programme, said the real tragedy and moral dilemma that healthcare workers would face in the coming days if they did not have personal protective equipment would be whether or not to treat a Covid-19 patient at all.
The numbers of new deaths and infections continue to fall in China
The country reported 22 new deaths, the lowest number of new cases on record. There were 40 new cases nationwide, with most in Hubei. 
According to the World Health Organization, 80% of cases in China have had a mild or moderate infection. But Dr Maria Van Kerkhove said the mortality in people aged older than 80 who become infected was about 20%. She stressed that the rate was not based on the very latest data.
Italy plunges into chaos
Deaths increased more than 50% to 366 and government plans to lock down large parts of the north of the country, or about 25% of the population, were leaked to the media on Sunday.


Topics



Coronavirus outbreak




Coronavirus: at a glance






Infectious diseases




Medical research




Microbiology




Biology




news






Share on Facebook






Share on Twitter






Share via Email






Share on LinkedIn






Share on Pinterest






Share on WhatsApp






Share on Messenger








Reuse this content




 