Coronaviral: the best memes, tweets and cartoons to get you through – open thread

These stories are designed to offer practical advice, provide some entertainment, foster a sense of social cohesion, and remind people of the good in the world during these strange and isolating times.



Silver linings: how to stay positive during the coronavirus crisis







Read more





When William Shakespeare was quarantined by the plague, according to Shakespearean scholar James Shapiro, he wrote a few things. Antony and Cleopatra. King Lear. Macbeth. Sure. Good for him!
Some of us are now also in quarantine, and we, too, are doing our best work: sitting in our tracksuit pants, munching on toast and grasping with unfounded desperation for good memes that will age terribly.
Please enjoy, and add your own in the comments.

Chris (Simpsons artist) 
(@getbentsaggy)
remember to wash your hands xox pic.twitter.com/YB7GH6zPtW

March 4, 2020

-

Matthew Foldi 
(@MatthewFoldi)
“How’s nationwide self-quarantine going?” pic.twitter.com/oP7sdQiUPA

March 14, 2020

-

Nicola Coughlan 
(@nicolacoughlan)
Stay safe friends x pic.twitter.com/krUBYLoewn

March 16, 2020

-

Sir Michael 
(@Michael1979)
QUARANTINE DIARYDay 1: I have stocked up on enough non-perishable food and supplies to last me for months, maybe years, so that I can remain in isolation for as long as it takes to see out this pandemicDay 1 + 45 minutes: I am in the supermarket because I wanted a Twix

March 12, 2020

-

Aditya Shah 
(@IDdocAdi)
"CDC does not recommend that people who are well wear a facemask to protect themselves from respiratory diseases, including COVID-19"#stewardmeme pic.twitter.com/7rD7PfqY9a

February 27, 2020

-

Alex Doenau 
(@Batrock)
MGMT have advice for times of crisis:•Control yourself•Take only what you need from it•A family of trees wanted to be haunted

March 17, 2020


-

katherine morayati 
(@morayati)
me, partying with all my swords at the swords festivalme, social distancing alone with my swords pic.twitter.com/8nlfVlD5Bf

March 14, 2020

-

indie 
(@INDIEWASHERE)
self quarantine at my bosses house so far so good pic.twitter.com/CeEceDrXsg

March 15, 2020

-















View this post on Instagram



















 Mastering the art of social distancing since forever. Srsly tho follow public health advice and if you can: self-isolate, work from home, cancel gatherings.
A post shared by  Keeping Up with the KPIs (@kuwtkpis) on Mar 15, 2020 at 2:30pm PDT


-

Aparna Nancherla 
(@aparnapkin)
oh nowwww everyone wanna know what introverts do for fun

March 13, 2020

-

Tommy Siegel 
(@TommySiegel)
a guide to paper-free hand dryers pic.twitter.com/rBJoS7wI5f

September 20, 2018

-

Julie Klausner 
(@julieklausner)
Not now, Neil https://t.co/dnuDeIpkXO

March 14, 2020

-

Sarah Hagi 
(@geekylonglegs)
Wash your hands to scatman pic.twitter.com/SH4jHsld2p

March 10, 2020

-

Sara Jefry 
(@SaraJefry)
Your grandparents were called to war. You’re being called to sit on your couch. You can do this. #QuarantineLife

March 15, 2020

Did we miss your favourite? Please add it in the comments below:


Topics



Instagram




The good place






Coronavirus outbreak




Twitter




Social media




Comedy




features






Share on Facebook






Share on Twitter






Share via Email






Share on LinkedIn






Share on Pinterest






Share on WhatsApp






Share on Messenger








Reuse this content




 