Premier League, Football League and WSL suspended until April

The Premier League, the Football League and the Women’s Super League have suspended all matches until the weekend of 3-5 April in response to the coronavirus pandemic.
An unprecedented development, it follows the revelation overnight that several Premier League clubs have members of staff, including players and coaches, who are displaying symptoms of the virus.



Premier League and British football set for shutdown due to coronavirus – live







Read more





The Scottish FA has taken even stronger measures, announcing that all football under its jurisdiction will be suspended until further notice. That means this Sunday’s Old Firm derby is off as well as all other games right down to grassroots leagues.
In England, however, the National League confirmed that it would be fulfilling its fixtures this weekend, including a home match for Notts County who regularly draw crowds of over 5,000 people. Grassroots football will also be allowed to continue as normal for now.
At the international level, the FA has also announced that the two England friendlies due to be played at the end of March, against Denmark and Italy at Wembley, have been called off.
In Europe, Uefa has announced the postponement of all pending fixtures in the Champions League and Europa League to an as yet unspecified date.
The Premier League said in a statement: “The Premier League, FA, EFL and WSL have collectively agreed to postpone the professional game in England.
“Following a meeting of shareholders today, it was unanimously decided to suspend the Premier League with the intention of returning on 4 April, subject to medical advice and conditions at the time.
“In this unprecedented situation we are working closely with our clubs, Government, the FA and EFL and can reassure everyone the health and welfare of players, staff and supporters are our priority.
“Despite the challenges, it is the Premier League’s aim to reschedule the displaced fixtures, when it is safe to do so.”



All Champions League and Europa League games next week postponed







Read more





The Premier League called an emergency meeting late on Thursday night after it was revealed that the Arsenal head coach, Mikel Arteta, had tested positive for Covid-19. By Friday morning, however, the Chelsea player Callum Hudson-Odoi also confirmed he had the disease while Watford, Everton and West Ham United all announced they had put staff into self-isolation in the hope of slowing the spread of the virus.
In a letter to EFL chairmen, revealed by the BBC, the EFL chairman, Rick Parry, suggested there is the possibility that the season may yet be completed, should Uefa postpone the European Championship during its own extraordinary meeting on Tuesday.
“As many of you will be aware Uefa meet on Tuesday to discuss their approach to Euro 2020 as well as Champions League/Europa League as well as the domestic situation facing the European Leagues,” Parry wrote.
“It is anticipated that the outcome of these deliberations may provide opportunities which may be beneficial to completing our League Season or at the very least inform our contingency planning.”
Having announced the cancellation of its two upcoming England men’s fixtures, the FA said it would refund those who had bought tickets within 14 days.


Topics



Football






Premier League




Football League




Championship




League One




League Two




news






Share on Facebook






Share on Twitter






Share via Email






Share on LinkedIn






Share on Pinterest






Share on WhatsApp






Share on Messenger








Reuse this content




 