Care workers could be redeployed to UK coronavirus hotspots

Care workers could be redeployed to look after elderly people in coronavirus hotspots across the UK as officials investigate whether criminal records checks need to be loosened to fill vacancies left by sick carers.
Whitehall officials have started talks with nursing homes and home care operators about how to pool workers in preparation for large numbers of care visitors and care home workers going off sick or self-isolating.
The Department of Health and Social Care has asked providers whether the system of obligatory background checks for workers who have close physical contact with vulnerable people is a barrier to implementing the emergency plan, care industry sources said.
Altering the requirement could also allow people who have recently left care work or retirees whose background checks have expired to be drafted back in without the usual weeks-long wait for approval, according to a Whitehall source.
Care bosses have said that without emergency measures the projected levels of infection in the UK could force homes to close and residents to be moved to NHS facilities, causing considerable distress and increasing the burden on already stretched clinical services.
The sick rate among care workers is usually under 3% but if the government’s predictions that a fifth of the population could be off work become a reality then the care sector could be depleted by about 220,000 workers.
“If [staff] have to self-isolate, we will see massive challenges in the sector,” said Nadra Ahmed, chair of the National Care Association, which represents more than 600 small and medium-sized care homes. “The regulations say you must have enough staff to deliver the service based on assessed need. If you have 20 residents and 18 staff and six go down, you don’t want to be doing that.”
Care employers must carry out enhanced disclosure checks on staff, which can take weeks to process. A more limited check of whether a potential carer is barred from working with vulnerable people allows them to work immediately but only under supervision.
Operators are braced for fatalities and fear that already stretched social care teams could be unable to meet their care duties. A study in China last month found that the fatality rate among people aged 80 and over was almost 15%, compared with less than 1% among the under-50s.
Ahmed said care homes were well practised in controlling infection, but added: “We have to anticipate there will be some fatalities, but it won’t be for want of trying.”
One care worker in the east Midlands told the Guardian that plans to parachute staff into affected areas were not realistic. “Most people aren’t going to want to deploy,” said the worker. “You are going to be putting people into a hot zone where people are infected. It creates a vicious circle.”
She said carers were not easily transplanted because the people they look after have highly complex needs, and she warned that low pay in the sector meant people were unlikely to tell the truth about whether they feft ill. “They fear they won’t be paid,” she said. “Nobody can survive on statutory sick pay.”
Boris Johnson announced on Wednesday that workers who self-isolate would be eligible for statutory sick pay from their first day off, rather than their fourth as previously mandated, in order to encourage them to self-isolate.
Dave Prentis, the general secretary of the trade union Unison, which represents care workers, welcomed the move but said: “[It] won’t help care staff whose employers are telling them they won’t get paid at all if they go into isolation. Nor will it provide comfort to workers on zero-hours contracts, or those with multiple jobs bringing in less than the £118 weekly threshold at which sick pay kicks in.”
Home care providers have reported that some clients have turned care workers away out of fear they may bring infection. Care home managers are encouraging family members to think twice before visiting relatives and to stay in touch by phone.
“It is difficult for our services because in hospitals you can close down wards but we are trying to keep these places as a home from home,” said Ahmed. “We are doing our best to meet our residents’ social needs and that means visiting. If you have a level of dementia, you need routine. If someone doesn’t come in, the impact could be quite emotionally difficult.”
Her advice to relatives is: “Make sure you don’t have a temperature, and if you are unsure, don’t come in. We are saying to people to call [by phone] a bit more often.”
A spokesperson for the Department of Health and Social Care said it was working with care providers, directors of adult social services and local government to make “the best possible preparations”.
They added: “The UK is extremely well prepared for these types of outbreaks and Public Health England has issued tailored guidance for care providers setting out action to be taken in a variety of circumstances.” 


Topics



Care workers






Social care




Coronavirus outbreak




news






Share on Facebook






Share on Twitter






Share via Email






Share on LinkedIn






Share on Pinterest






Share on WhatsApp






Share on Messenger








Reuse this content




 