Tokyo Olympics chief says coronavirus could disrupt Games

A senior Olympic official in Japan has warned that the coronavirus outbreak could “throw cold water” on preparations for Tokyo 2020, although organisers insist that there are no plans to cancel the Games.
Toshiro Muto, the chief executive of the Tokyo Olympic organising committee, said he was concerned about the impact the spread of the virus was having in the run-up to the Olympics, which are due to open in 170 days.
“I am seriously worried that the spread of the infectious disease could throw cold water on the momentum toward the Games,” Muto said during a meeting in Tokyo with officials from the International Paralympic Committee. “I hope that it will be stamped out as soon as possible.”
Muto’s concerns were echoed by Saburo Kawabuchi, the mayor of the athletes’ village, where 11,000 competitors will stay during the Games.
“I truly hope that the infectious disease will die down somehow so that we will be able to operate the Paralympics and Olympics smoothly,” he said. “In the worst case we will do our utmost for the athletes so that they will be able to concentrate on performing their best.”
The coronavirus outbreak, which has killed 490 people in mainland China and infected more than 23,000, has disrupted several qualifying events that were due to be held in the country, including those for women’s football and basketball, boxing and badminton.
Quick guide What are coronavirus symptoms and should I go to a doctor?  
 Show 
 Hide  


What is Covid-19?

It is caused by a member of the coronavirus family that has never been encountered before. Like other coronaviruses, it has come from animals.



What are the symptoms this coronavirus causes?

The virus can cause pneumonia-like symptoms. Those who have fallen ill are reported to suffer coughs, fever and breathing difficulties.
In the UK, the National Heath Service has defined the symptoms as:
a high temperature - you feel hot to touch on your chest or back
a new continuous cough - this means you've started coughing repeatedly



Should I go to the doctor if I have a cough?

Medical advice varies around the world - with many countries imposing travel bans and lockdowns to try and prevent the spread of the virus. In many place people are being told to stay at home rather than visit a doctor of hospital in person. Check with your local authorities.
In the UK, NHS advice is that anyone with symptoms should stay at home for at least 7 days. If you live with other people, they should stay at home for at least 14 days, to avoid spreading the infection outside the home.



Is the virus being transmitted from one person to another?

Yes. China’s national health commission confirmed human-to-human transmission in January.



How many people have been affected?

China’s national health commission confirmed human-to-human transmission in January. As of 19 March, more than 219,000 people have been infected in more than 150 countries, according to the Johns Hopkins University Center for Systems Science and Engineering.
There have been over 8,900 deaths globally. Just over 3,200 of those deaths have occurred in mainland China. Many of those who have died had underlying health conditions, which the coronavirus complicated.
More than 84,000 people are recorded as having recovered from the coronavirus.




Was this helpful?







Thank you for your feedback.

There have been no deaths from the virus in Japan, but it has the largest number of infections – 33 – outside China. On Wednesday, 10 passengers onboard a luxury cruise liner off the Japanese port of Yokohama tested positive for the illness, forcing health authorities to place all 3,700 passengers and crew in quarantine for 14 days.
Craig Spence, a spokesman for the Paralympic committee, said: “We have full confidence that the relevant authorities, in particular here in Japan and the World Health Organization, will take all the necessary measures to address the situation.”
But Tokyo’s governor, Yuriko Koike, has suggested that failure to contain the outbreak could affect the Games. “We must firmly tackle the new coronavirus to contain it, or we are going to regret it,” she said last week.
Demand for the 7.8m Olympics tickets is high, with applications exceeding supply by at least 10 times. About 4.5m tickets have been distributed domestically via a lottery.


Topics



Coronavirus outbreak






Tokyo Olympic Games 2020




Japan




Infectious diseases




Asia Pacific






Share on Facebook






Share on Twitter






Share via Email






Share on LinkedIn






Share on Pinterest






Share on WhatsApp






Share on Messenger








Reuse this content




 