TV tonight: David Schwimmer's comedy sleuth

Intelligence 9pm, Sky One
Nick Mohammed pens and stars in this new comedy set within the secretive confines of the GCHQ cybersecurity team – a close-knit group of misfits whose subdued, biscuit-eating existence is disrupted by the arrival of American NSA agent Jerry (David Schwimmer). In this opening double bill, the culture clash begins as Jerry tries to enlist the group in a spot of team building before Mohammed accidentally deletes all the personnel files, forcing everyone to redo their aptitude tests – with worrying results. Ammar Kalia
The Yorkshire Steam Railway: All Aboard 8pm, Channel 5
Another series of happy, sooty-faced escapism. As the documentary follows the everyday challenges of the heritage railway’s volunteers, this week’s not-too-arduous tasks are fixing the air pump on an S160 and reversing a restored buffet carriage into the engine shed yard. Jack Seale
Our Coast 8.30pm, BBC Two


 
 

 
 Facebook 
 
 Twitter 
 
 Pinterest 


 Seafarers ... Our Coast. Photograph: Iolo Penri/BBC Studios
Adrian Chiles and Mehreen Baig continue their jaunt down the County Down coastline, packing plenty in as always. In Belfast, Adrian visits the birthplace of the Titanic and attempts to park a 100-metre-long Dutch cargo ship. Meanwhile, Mehreen takes a kayak out on the turbulent waters of Strangford Lough. Ellen E Jones
Gogglebox 9pm, Channel 4
Our group of avid viewers return for another series of armchair criticism on the week’s TV. With coronavirus and post-Brexit news to contend with, alongside the many reality shows and a spate of new dramas, there will surely be plenty for our Gogglebox cast to watch, while we watch them. AK
Bumps 9.30pm, BBC One
Amanda Redman plays sixtysomething Anita, a mum of two who is looking to expand her brood by having a baby. As she explores her options, her 37-year-old daughter finds herself unexpectedly pregnant, sparking a cross-generational set of new beginnings. A one-off comedy by Lucy Montgomery and Rhys Thomas. AK
Frankie Boyle’s Tour of Scotland 10pm, BBC Two
Frankie travels from his home town of Glasgow to the seaside town of Ayr. He drops in on his old martial arts club for a training session with Tommy Carruthers, “the man who turned being Glaswegian into a martial art”, and meets former “Glasgow Girl” campaigner Amal Azzudin. Ali Catterall
Film choice


 
 

 
 Facebook 
 
 Twitter 
 
 Pinterest 


 A murky tale of mystery ... Sunset.
Sunset, 2.55am, Sky Cinema PremiereFollowing the harrowing, Auschwitz-set Son of Saul, Hungarian director László Nemes moves to 1913 Budapest, where young Írisz (Juli Jakab) returns to work in the swish hat store previously owned by her late parents. She seeks her brother, on the run for murder, in this murky, fascinating tale of mystery. Paul Howlett
Today’s sport
Women’s T20 Cricket World Cup: Australia v India 8am, Sky Sports Main Event. The opening Group A match.
International T20 Cricket: South Africa v Australia 4pm, Sky Sports Main Event. The first in the three-match series in Johannesburg.
Championship Football: Derby County v Fulham 7.30pm, Sky Sports Main Event. Intriguing clash from Pride Park.


Topics



Television




TV tonight






TV comedy




features






Share on Facebook






Share on Twitter






Share via Email






Share on LinkedIn






Share on Pinterest






Share on WhatsApp






Share on Messenger








Reuse this content




 