No one wants the nickname Ashy Ankles. I’m fighting back with moisturiser | Romesh Ranganathan

I recently did some filming that required me to get changed on camera. I have banged on enough about my weight, but on this occasion another body issue came into sharp focus. I had forgotten to moisturise, and my legs looked as if I’d been rolling around naked on a building site: ashy.
Ashy skin is the bane of any person of colour. You learn very quickly that if you do not slather yourself with some sort of moisturiser from top to toe, at some point a part of your body is going to come into view looking like a Pompeii escapee.
Every morning I apply two coats of cocoa butter before getting dressed. Sometimes I do it too soon after stepping out of the shower, when my skin is too wet to absorb it. What I should do is wipe it off, get dry and start again. Instead, I clear my next hour to aggressively rub the cream in, while hoping it doesn’t give me some sort of RSI. My wife tells me she also has to do this, and that once again I am moaning about nothing. My point to her is that, if she ever forgets to moisturise, she doesn’t spend the day looking like a decaying woman.
I know, this isn’t a real problem – people have the coronavirus. And the truth is, this is theoretically solved simply by not forgetting to moisturise in the morning. But over the last year, I have noticed a change. The other day I woke up, got ready, did my usual twin cocoa coat, got dressed and headed out. Halfway through the day, I was sitting with my brother and a mate, when my brother pointed out that my ankles were greyish. I laughed, thinking he was making it up. There was no way: I knew that I’d varnished. He and his mate then started riffing on nicknames for me, including: Captain Ash, Bangers and Ash, Rom Kardashian, and their favourite, the on-the-nose but effective Ashy Ankles. I was offended, but then looked down and saw that from my calves to my feet, it looked as if a rhino had decided to wear Adidas.
On the surface, this sounds like nothing; why don’t I wear longer socks? But it’s not this I’m worried about – it’s the fact that I now need more than one application of moisturiser a day. As if it wasn’t bad enough that I have to bathe in the stuff first thing, it now only buys me a morning of looking OK until I have to do it all over again. I know allowances are made for people’s various needs, but I don’t think it’s OK to ask for a work break so that I can rebaste like a sad Christmas turkey.



I’m getting up at 5am to ‘chase the tiger’. How long can I sustain this madness?







Read more





I now carry seven or eight small tubes of moisturiser with me at any one time, attacking problem areas as and when I see them. If I shake someone’s hand and notice my wrists are a bit The Mummy Returns I can apply immediate relief in a moisturiser-triage situation. Just yesterday, I was out and about wearing short jeans, saw a flash of ash, dropped to the ground and dealt with it straight away. I was even able to point out to my brother recently that he was looking a bit Sahara and offer him some cream, before dubbing him “Lord Ashington”.
It’s incredible how much this has improved my life. I feel prepared for any skin eventuality. People say that when bad things happen, good things can come from that; me packing moisturiser is the good thing. And the bad thing was getting so desperate on that day’s filming that I rubbed margarine into my legs. I spent the day smelling like breakfast – but rather that than my brother calling me Natasha Bedingfeelslikeyouhavedryskin.


Topics



Life and style




Romesh Ranganathan’s midlife crisis






Skincare




features






Share on Facebook






Share on Twitter






Share via Email






Share on LinkedIn






Share on Pinterest






Share on WhatsApp






Share on Messenger








Reuse this content




 