Timeline: how Australia responded to the coronavirus outbreak

The understanding of the novel coronavirus has evolved, with authorities now conceding that person-to-person transmission has occurred outside Hubei – even in some circumstances where the sick person displayed few or no symptoms.
Australia’s response to the coronavirus has escalated from suggesting only those in direct contact with the sick should be excluded from school, to warnings in some states that all students returning from China should stay away for a fortnight.
The Australian government has fumbled the issue of whether evacuees from China will be charged for flights to Christmas Island – first insisting they would be, then conceding that was not standard practice.
And now Australia has implemented even more extreme measures excluding travellers from mainland China, a measure then copied by New Zealand.
So how did the improved understanding of the disease lead to starker warnings?
12 December
First case of novel coronavirus is detected in Wuhan, China but is not disclosed for several weeks.
7 January
Chinese authorities confirm they have identified the novel virus, named 2019-nCoV.
9 January
The first death, of a 61-year-old man from Wuhan is linked to the virus.
20 January
Chinese authorities confirm the virus can spread from person-to-person.
The novel coronavirus with pandemic potential is added as a listed human disease under the Biosecurity Act of 2015, enabling the use of enhanced border measures in Australia.
21 January



Whole world must be ready to deal with coronavirus, says WHO







Read more





Australia’s chief medical officer, Brendan Murphy, explains that “additional proportionate border measures” are in place, with biosecurity and border security staff to meet passengers from three direct flights a week from Wuhan to Sydney.
Passengers are given information and asked to identify themselves if they have symptoms such as fever, with New South Wales health officials to follow-up with passengers suspected of having the virus. Murphy says authorities also worked to identify which of the 160 weekly flights from China were likely to contain travellers from Wuhan.
23 January
The Department of Foreign Affairs and Trade raises the level of travel advice for Wuhan to level three: “reconsider the need to travel”.
Flight MU 749 from Wuhan lands at Sydney Airport and is subject to the biosecurity protocols. No ill passengers are found on the flight although Murphy notes that “it is always possible that … there could be people incubating the virus on that plane today”.
Murphy advises that Chinese authorities have stopped transport out of Wuhan city, meaning that flight will be the last direct from Wuhan to Australia, nor will there be transport out of Wuhan to other parts of China.
Morrison notes the department of health “does not currently recommend mass screening of passengers at airports, including thermal scanning, due to the limited evidence of effectiveness of those measures”.




Play Video





3:18





 Coronavirus and the voices of Wuhan: 'My anxiety is increasing day by day' – video
24 January
Dfat raises the level of travel advice for <U+200B><U+200B><U+200B><U+200B><U+200B><U+200B>Wuhan and Hubei province in China to level four: “do not travel”.
25 January
The first case of coronavirus in Australia is confirmed – a man from Wuhan who Murphy says travelled on flight CZ321 from Guangzhou to Melbourne on 19 January.
“He was well when he arrived but developed an illness during the last week and is currently in stable condition under isolation in a hospital in Melbourne,” Murphy says.
A further three cases are confirmed in Sydney – all three men – one who arrived on 6 January, one on 19 January and one on 20 January.
26 January
The federal government provides information to Victorian and NSW authorities to contact passengers from the planes bearing those who later developed symptoms and then tested positive for the virus.
Murphy says “it’s likely, because this virus is similar to other coronaviruses, that people aren’t infectious until they have symptoms”.
“But because these two patients developed symptoms within about 24 hours of arrival, we’re being absolutely cautious and contacting those people.”
27 January
Murphy confirms a fourth case in NSW, the fifth in Australia.
Murphy says there is “no evidence of sustained human-to-human transmission outside of the Hubei province” and insufficient evidence to support quarantining passengers as they arrive.
“I think, as I said before, now that the Chinese government has locked down the Hubei province, which is where the majority of these people have come from, it’s quite hard to get out of China from those at-risk areas, and we think the risk of someone coming on current flights is probably very low.
“So you might be quarantining thousands of people for little benefit.”
The Australian expert committee confirms its position “that any child that has been a contact of someone who has this disease should be excluded from school for 14 days”, he says.



Australian coronavirus evacuees to be quarantined on Christmas Island







Read more





“But children who are well who have not had any contact or any exposure to an infected person that may have come back from China, should not be excluded.”
28 January
Murphy advises that “there is no need for the Australian public to wear masks” because there has been no human-to-human transmission in Australia.
“The only people who should wear masks in relation to this virus are those who are unwell and have a relevant travel history.”
“The expert advice is quarantining is not of practical public health value at the moment.”
“The advice of all of the public health experts that convened yesterday remains the same – that people who have come from China should be treated like any normal member of the community unless they develop symptoms of fever, flu-like symptoms that could suggest this virus.”
Morrison announces the Australian government is looking to send consular officials to Hubei to assist and develop further options to help Australian citizens.
Dfat upgrades its advisory to reconsider travel to China due to 4,500 cases of coronavirus, many outside of Hubei province.
29 January
The Australian Health Protection Principal Committee (AHPPC) announces it is “aware of very recent cases of novel coronavirus who are, at the time of diagnosis, asymptomatic or minimally symptomatic”.
Murphy adds there was “one fairly convincing case of probable transmission from a pre-symptomatic case to other people two days prior to the onset of symptoms”.
“[The] AHPPC believes that we should take a highly precautionary approach, and is making the following new recommendations: contacts of any confirmed novel coronavirus cases now must be isolated in their home for 14 days following exposure.



What is coronavirus and how worried should we be?







Read more





“Return travellers who have been in the Hubei province of China must also be isolated in their home for 14 days after leaving Hubei province, other than of course seeking medical care.”
However, the committee does not recommend self-isolation for travellers from other parts of China or from other countries.
The education departments in several states, including Victoria, the Australian Capital Territory and Tasmania, replicate the advice, asking for self-isolation only for those who had travelled to Hubei province.
Several others go further:
The NSW government requests that children who have visited China in the last two weeks not attend school or childcare services until 14 days have lapsed from their date of departure from China.
Queensland specifies that returned travellers who have visited China, including Hong Kong, should not attend school, childcare or TAFE for 14 days after leaving China, including Hong Kong.
Murphy acknowledges that some states have “taken additional measures” but notes “the health authorities, as of yesterday, weren’t recommending that”.
Morrison announces the government plans to evacuate some Australians from Wuhan and the surrounding Hubei province, flying the most “isolated and vulnerable” of 600 citizens to quarantine on Christmas Island.
The government also releases 1m masks from its stockpile, to be distributed through the primary health network and pharmacists.
Murphy says the masks “are for patients with the relevant travel history and symptoms and their doctors who are assessing them, we’re not recommending that the general Australian public wear masks or take protection”.
There are now seven confirmed cases of 2019-nCoV in Australia: one in Queensland, two in Victoria, and four in New South Wales.
30 January
The home affairs minister, Peter Dutton, defends the plans to use Christmas Island, after the Australian Medical Association president, Tony Bartone, said the group had not been consulted and wanted a more “humane solution”.
Dutton explains Christmas Island was chosen because “I can’t clear a hospital in Sydney or Melbourne to accommodate 600 people”. “We don’t have a facility otherwise that can take this number of people.”
Dutton says that some states have gone “beyond” the medical advice, which is a matter for those states. He confirms that evacuees from China sent to Christmas Island will be charged.
Two people with coronavirus are isolated in Gold Coast University Hospital after taking a Tigerairways flight from Melbourne to Coolangatta on Tigerair flight TT566 on January 27.
31 January
The World Health Organization declares a public health emergency of international concern over the global outbreak of coronavirus.
Murphy says Australia has been “been calling for that for some days”.
“It doesn’t mean much for Australia,” he says. “We are already responding very actively to ensure that we detect and contain any cases of this virus that have been exported here from China.”
Scott Morrison insists it is “not true” that people evacuated during the Arab Spring were not charged, claiming the plan by DFAT to charge for assisted departures is part of “the standard arrangements”.
Health minister Greg Hunt confirms there are nine cases in Australia, all stable, with two NSW patients released after being declared post-viral.
1 February
The Australian government announces that foreign arrivals from mainland China will not be allowed entry into Australia. Australian citizens, permanent residents and their immediate family, legal guardians and spouses are excepted from the measure.
The government also raised the travel advice warning to level four, recommending that no Australian travel to mainland China.
All travellers arriving out of mainland China (not just Hubei Province) after 1 February will be asked to self-isolate for a period of 14 days from the time they leave mainland China.
2 February
The treasurer Josh Frydenberg announces that Australians evacuated from China will not be charged $1,000, blaming DFAT for providing incorrect advice about previous practice.
There are now 12 confirmed cases of coronavirus in Australia, although a third case in NSW was discharged having cleared the virus.
Internationally, there are approximately 14,561 confirmed cases of 2019-nCoV, and 305 deaths have been reported – a 2.09% fatality rate.
3 February
New Zealand follows Australia and eight other countries’ lead – closing its borders to any foreigners arriving from China – including those who have passed through in transit.
Australian foreign minister Marise Payne reveals an “assisted departure” flight out of Wuhan operated by Qantas is in the air. It is carrying 243 Australian citizens and permanent residents.
Murphy updates there are now 17,386 reported cases of coronavirus and 362 deaths, all but one of which is in China. There are 181 cases outside of China.


Topics



Coronavirus outbreak






Infectious diseases




China




Asia Pacific




Health (Australia news)




Health (Society)




Schools




news






Share on Facebook






Share on Twitter






Share via Email






Share on LinkedIn






Share on Pinterest






Share on WhatsApp






Share on Messenger








Reuse this content




 