Bear Grylls teams up with Scouts for indoor survival activities

He’s better known for his derring-do in more adventurous surroundings but Bear Grylls has now turned his attention to an altogether different challenge – Covid-19.
The world’s best known survival expert is launching a package of 100 indoor activities to keep families “busy, focused and cheerful” and ward off cabin fever during the Coronavirus lockdown.
After Friday’s closure of schools millions of families will be cooped up indefinitely and Grylls, the chief scout, is warning that without a plan, “a week stuck at home for a family can be as tough as a week in the mountains”.
Grylls, a former soldier, is launching the Great Indoors initiative with the Scout movement, which is also planning to provide live weekly video feeds explaining some of the activities over Facebook. They will be fronted by Grylls and scout ambassadors, including the TV naturalist Steve Backshall and Helen Glover, the double Olympic rowing champion.
The activities include making lolly-stick catapults, becoming a “black-out poet”, investigating local heraldry, tackling origami and designing and making hot-air balloons. All the activities can be carried out in the house or garden. They have been drawn from a back catalogue of activities devised over the years by scout leaders across the country.
“Young people have such huge energy and that needs channelling in a positive way,” said Grylls. “Whether you’re climbing Everest, or just trying to make it through to bedtime, a little planning and positive spirit will make all the difference. It’s not often you’ll find me talking about the great indoors – but this is the exception. Try them out, look after each other and, most of all, make this challenging time a safe and positive time.”
Q&A How much do children spread coronavirus?  
 Show 
 Hide  
The diverging approaches to school closures may stem from the considerable uncertainty around the extent to which children are playing a role in spreading Covid-19.
Children make up a tiny minority of confirmed cases – fewer than 1% of positive tests in China were children under nine. It is probable that a bigger pool are getting infected but only experiencing mild or no symptoms. Among those who have tested positive, nearly 6% developed very serious illness, according to an assessment of 2,000 patients aged under 18 in Wuhan, with under-fives and babies being most at risk.
A significant unknown is how infectious children are, assuming large numbers are getting infected. Early evidence suggests that around 50% of transmission in the pandemic at large has involved asymptomatic people and children could be among this group.
“It seems most plausible to me that they are being infected but are at low risk of developing disease,” said Prof Peter Smith, an epidemiologist at the London School of Hygiene and Tropical Medicine. “We know that for flu, children are important transmitters of infection, which is the basis for the flu vaccination programme directed at children, but we do not know yet how important they are as transmitters of coronavirus. So closing schools would be based on the assumption that they do make an important contribution to transmission.”
Rates of various illnesses are seen to rise and fall at the start and end of school terms. School holidays were thought to have led to a plateau in the 2009 swine flu pandemic. Also advised hygiene and social distancing measures, such as hand washing and reduced physical contact, just aren’t very effective in a primary school playground setting. So there is the potential for schools to act as a local fountain of infection for the surrounding area.
“Every mother and father knows that when kids go back to school they’re going to get hammered by colds and flus and sore throats,” said Paul Hunter, professor in medicine at the University of East Anglia.
This uncertain science has to be carefully weighed against the certain disruption and cost of school closures, including taking large numbers of doctors and nurses out of the workplace, and unintended consequences such as grandparents, who are among the most vulnerable, taking on childcare and facing greater exposure.



Was this helpful?







Thank you for your feedback.

The Scouts movement said the 100 activities were designed to have clear outcomes, such as developing communication skills or learning how to problem solve, which will also support schools in their aim to keep young people learning in their homes.
“If young people’s minds aren’t occupied by doing something interesting and creative their ability to learn drops off,” said a spokesman for the Scouts. “We are trying to keep this going because all this is going to end one day and children will go back to school.”



School closures in the UK are a financial catastrophe for poorer families | Torsten Bell







Read more





Psychologists have advised families in isolation to structure their day and try to avoid conflict with a key strategy being spending brief periods of time away from each other.
Other parents have posted their own strategies online, ranging from the low-energy option of putting the television on, to more elaborate initiatives such as buying toys from charity shops to revitalise children’s play time. Several people stress that children should still get fresh air in the garden, but that will be harder for those who live in flats and want to maintain social distancing by not going outside.
Six of the best Scout ideas
Dear Future Me – write a postcard to yourself
The game leader should give everyone a postcard and ideas for how far in the future they’d like to send their postcard. The players write or draw a note to their future self. Grownups can help with scribing or spelling.
Storm in a teacup
Make a tornado in a jar using water, sand and a drop of washing-up liquid. “Watch your storm brew, swirl and dissipate,” advise the Scouts.
Fabulous fancy frames
Create a frame for a photograph that makes you smile then make a gallery for everyone to admire. Decorate the border of the frame with pens, stamps, stickers and other photos you have taken.
Mark my words - make a bookmark
“This activity is a chance to get creative, but it also reminds everyone how to look after books,” the Scouts say. “Bookmarks help people remember where they’ve got to without damaging the book. What other materials could bookmarks be made from?”
Weekly wins – make diaries to record weekly achievements
“Every time the diary owner does something nice or something good happens, they should make a note of it,” say the Scouts. “Each week the group should gather and each person should say as much or as little as they like about how many or how few wins they had that week.”
Changing your coat – make a heraldic coat of arms
Look at an existing coat of arms and choose different colours and animals to design your own shield. Decide what you want the shield to say about you.


Topics



Bear Grylls






Coronavirus outbreak




Scouts and scouting




Children




Family




news






Share on Facebook






Share on Twitter






Share via Email






Share on LinkedIn






Share on Pinterest






Share on WhatsApp






Share on Messenger








Reuse this content




 