I’m the Guardian’s new readers’ editor, and I welcome your views | Elisabeth Ribbans

As I write this first column in my third week as the fifth Guardian readers’ editor, I am still in learning mode. It would be disingenuous to say I arrive as an outsider; I am a former managing editor who has spent half her adult life working on the Guardian, Guardian Weekly or Observer. But in 2013 I left and, until I returned for my interview last autumn, had crossed the threshold only twice and briefly. As a reader I found the journalism indispensable, but as a journalist I had lost track of exactly how it was made.
Seven years is a long time in the life of a news organisation in the 21st century. I’m only slightly embarrassed to say I needed a diagram to see how all the moving parts fit together in 2020. Guardian journalism happens every minute of every day, over at least a dozen platforms, from its publishing centres in London, New York and Sydney.
As well as the website (with four editions), three print titles and three apps, there are podcasts, documentaries and social-media feeds. From Instagram posts to the long read, from Today in Focus to a video explainer such as Sarah Boseley’s on coronavirus that has been watched more than 7m times in the past 10 days, the “readers’” editor is clearly here for listeners and viewers too.



Our desk also handles corrections, and feedback, and promotes your voice to editors

What doesn’t change are the values, and what shouldn’t change are high standards. It hardly needs spelling out how much trust in news matters – a commitment to accuracy, fairness and accountability is owed to those who read it and those who are written about. Public admission of errors may not be pleasant for those behind them (I still burn hot over slips I have made), but ultimately it assists rather than hinders good journalism.
As readers’ editor I report directly to the Scott Trust rather than the editor-in-chief, so that I can consider comments, concerns and complaints from a position of independence. I sit physically in an office just off the London newsroom, but figuratively I sit halfway between you (wherever you are in the world) and the journalism. My priority must be complaints under Guardian News & Media’s editorial code – an updated version of which is in progress – but our desk also handles corrections, and feedback, and promotes your voice to editors.
I am also learning that the vast majority of emails, letters and phone calls (about 32,000 a year) are from people being helpful in picking up small mistakes, or sincere in raising a serious concern. Sometimes a writer also appears in the inbox to report, unprompted, an inaccuracy in their own work. That is the system working.
As I begin, I make five pledges:
1. I start from a position that all complaints are made in good faith – and equally that no journalist comes to work to mislead or mistreat readers
2. All reader feedback will be read and considered, even if the volume prevents a personal reply to each individual
3. I will seek new ways to honour the “open door” ethos for the benefit of readers
4. I will welcome your ideas for topics in this column
5. This is the last time I’ll write about myself.
• Elisabeth Ribbans is the Guardian’s readers’ editor


Topics



The Guardian




Open door






Journalism, publishing and public relations




comment






Share on Facebook






Share on Twitter






Share via Email






Share on LinkedIn






Share on Pinterest






Share on WhatsApp






Share on Messenger








Reuse this content




 