Friday briefing: Britain shuffles off the EU stage

Top story: ‘We have not done trade talks for 40 years’
Hello, it’s Friday morning – a sombre morning for those unhappy to see the UK officially leaving the European Union at 11 o’clock tonight. Warren Murray here with your guide to this, that and the other news of the day.
As we enter the last hours before the split from the EU, is Britain effectively declaring open season on itself? Donald Trump is poised to demand the NHS pay higher prices for US drugs in a free-trade deal with the UK, warns Kim Darroch, the esteemed peer and ex-diplomat. Britain’s outgoing ambassador to Washington – who had to resign after dispatches critical of the Trump administration were leaked – has predicted to the Guardian that the president will reward backers in drug firms and agriculture by forcing trade concessions from No 10. The UK, he argues, will struggle to come out a winner when “we have not done trade negotiations for 40 years”. “People talk about chlorinated chicken – it is a lot more than that,” Darroch said. “He believes in America first. And he believes, particularly, in rewarding people who vote for him and that is American farmers and big American corporations.”
There will be no “Big Ben bongs”, no church bells and no fireworks – they are illegal after 11pm – to mark the moment of Britain’s departure. The government says a countdown will be projected on to Downing Street buildings, though. When the moment of severance arrives, Boris Johnson will launch into a speech about the future of the UK. Demonstrators against Brexit will meet at Southbank in London with torches to “shine a light through the darkness”, with similar gatherings due to take place in Brighton and Bournemouth. Leave Means Leave will hold a rally. Sajid Javid will hand over one of the first of the 50p Brexit coins to the PM.
During 47 years of membership, the UK’s permanent representatives to the EU have been at the coalface of British diplomacy and negotiation in Europe. Speaking exclusively to the Guardian, the surviving nine “perm reps” – past and present – reflect on Britain’s European story.
Britons fly out of Wuhan – Among updates we are bringing you in our coronavirus live blog this morning: a flight carrying 83 UK citizens has taken off from Wuhan, the epicentre of the emergency, bound for Britain. The US government has warned Americans not to travel to China, where the death toll has reached at least 213. The World Health Organization (WHO) has declared a global health emergency. An increasing number of airlines have stopped flying to mainland China, including Air France KLM SA, British Airways, Germany’s Lufthansa and Virgin Atlantic, while others have reduced flights. The Italian prime minister, Giuseppe Conte, has said all air traffic between Italy and China will stop. His country has, meanwhile, experienced a spate of anti-Chinese incidents. Conspiracy theories and dangerous preventative “advice” have been circulating on the internet – we have rounded some of it up for debunking.
Trump on brink of acquittal – Donald Trump may be acquitted as early as today in his Senate impeachment trial. Key Republican swing votes that could have allowed witnesses to be called appeared to be falling away in overnight proceedings. Democrats have decried the situation as paving the way for a “lawless presidency” unable to be reined in by checks and balances. The Democrats have pushed for the president’s former national security adviser John Bolton to testify with what could be a damaging account of Trump’s “quid pro quo” strategy with Ukraine.
Lung cancer found too late – People with lung cancer are dying after being diagnosed late in A&E because their GP missed signs of the disease, often despite repeated visits, according to findings by experts. The proportion diagnosed in A&E – as many as 56% of people in some parts of England – are five times more likely to die within a year. Patients’ reluctance to have symptoms such as a persistent cough checked out can also delay diagnosis, especially among older people and those from poorer households. Prof Mick Peake, of the UK’s Lung Cancer Coalition, said: “We strongly urge GPs to have a low threshold for doing a chest X-ray or CT scan in patients where there is any suspicion of lung cancer.”
Warning of oil crash risk – The oil industry could face a global market shock if governments delay tackling the climate crisis, according to the thinktank Carbon Tracker. Its analysis warns that the longer governments wait, the tougher limits on the use of fossil fuels will need to be. Carbon Tracker says such a sudden “handbrake turn” could have a “forceful, abrupt and disorderly” impact on the global industry, wiping out billions of dollars worth of investments. The thinktank warned investors against oil market scenarios published by the International Energy Agency which predict a steady decline in demand rather than a sudden collapse. Existing forecasts are for oil demand to grow 0.6% a year over the next five years, but Carbon Tracker found a crackdown on emissions could shrink demand by 2.6% a year from 2025 onwards. Europe’s most vulnerable oil company is BP, according to the report, followed by Norway’s Equinor, Paris-headquartered Total, Italy’s Eni and Anglo-Dutch Shell.
Sex and the CofE – The archbishops of Canterbury and York have apologised over a statement issued by Church of England bishops that declared only married heterosexuals should have sex. Justin Welby and John Sentamu said they took responsibility for releasing the statement: “We are very sorry and recognise the division and hurt this has caused.” They did not retract the substance of the “pastoral guidance” but implied it should not have been issued while the CofE is in the midst of a review of its teaching on sexuality and marriage. The guidance said “sexual relationships outside heterosexual marriage are regarded as falling short of God’s purpose for human beings”, and that people in gay or straight civil partnerships should be sexually abstinent.
Today in Focus podcast: The Brexit gamble
Anushka Asthana looks back on an extraordinary period of chaos in politics since David Cameron called the EU referendum. Plus: on the day the UK leaves, Faiza Shaheen argues that remainers must now put their energy into ideas to take Britain forward.

Today in Focus
The Brexit gamble

 Sorry your browser does not support audio - but you can download here and listen https://audio.guim.co.uk/2020/01/30-76344-200131TIF_EUgamble1.mp3 






00:00:00




00:33:31




Lunchtime read: ‘The young are in despair’
After an indifferent sojourn in Hollywood, the film-maker Bong Joon-ho went back to South Korea to do his next film – and, in Parasite, produced an undisputed masterpiece. Why is his stunning critique of the class system striking chords all over the world?


 
 

 
 Facebook 
 
 Twitter 
 
 Pinterest 


 Bong Joon-ho. Photograph: Sarah Lee/The Guardian
Sport
England have been handed a major blow before the start of their Six Nations campaign after Anthony Watson was ruled out of Sunday’s match against France, with Eddie Jones leaning towards handing a debut to George Furbank in his place. More than 150 football-related racist incidents were reported to police last season, Home Office figures show, a rise of more than 50% on the year before and more than double the number from three seasons ago.
USA Gymnastics has filed a bankruptcy plan that includes an offer of $215m for sexual abuse survivors to settle their claims against the embattled organisation. Wigan won the opening game of the new Super League season 16-10 against Warrington, who had their captain, Chris Hill, sent off in the first half. Saqib Mahmood is looking to hit the 90mph mark during the coming white-ball fixtures in South Africa after feeling the benefit of Darren Gough’s short spell as an England coach. And Arsenal captain Kim Little has joined Fifpro’s new players’ council as she tries to give back to the game and influence what happens next.
Business
The collapse of Norton motorcycles was sad news for the manufacturing sector this week. But our reporter Simon Goodley reveals the full story behind the administration, involving hundreds of hapless pension holders, together with unsuspecting Norton customers, staff and even government ministers, who ploughed in millions of pounds in taxpayer support. Asian stocks have recovered some ground today after the WHO stepped back from supporting restrictions on trade with China due to the coronavirus outbreak. The FTSE100 is poised to rise 0.7% while the pound is on $1.31 and €1.187.
The papers
You can see all the front pages here today – herewith a summary. The Guardian illustrates Britain’s EU departure with the white cliffs of Dover, a union jack planted in a sandcastle in the foreground and the headline “Small island”. The Mail has the same backdrop but its headline is “A new dawn for Britain”, while the i calls it “UK’s leap into the unknown”.


 
 

 
 Facebook 
 
 Twitter 
 
 Pinterest 


 Guardian front page, Friday 31 January 2020.
“Our time has come” declares the Sun over a photo of Big Ben with the hands sitting on 11pm. “Yes we did” says the Express, which appears to attribute Brexit to itself and its readers. The Times goes with: “PM wants Canada-style trade deal with Brussels”.
The Telegraph front page pictures and paraphrases Johnson: “This is not an end, but a beginning”, while the FT has perhaps the most straightforward take: “Britain bows out of the EU with a mixture of optimism and regret”.
Sign up

The Guardian Morning Briefing is delivered to thousands of inboxes bright and early every weekday. If you are not already receiving it by email, you can sign up here.
For more news: www.theguardian.com

Topics



Guardian morning briefing








Share on Facebook






Share on Twitter






Share via Email






Share on LinkedIn






Share on Pinterest






Share on WhatsApp






Share on Messenger








Reuse this content




 