Atlético braced for noisy night at Anfield before going behind closed doors | Sid Lowe

No Madrileños will be at school on Wednesday but 2,800 of them will be at Anfield. Atlético Madrid were at the airport waiting for a plane bound for Liverpool when the latest report about coronavirus dropped. On Tuesday morning children in the Spanish capital went to class for the last time in two weeks, by order of the regional government; by the afternoon, as boarding began at Barajas airport, La Liga had announced that, in agreement with the health ministry, every first and second division game will be played behind closed doors for at least the next two match days.
This will be the last game Atlético’s fans go to for a long time. It may well be the last game any fans go to, in fact. Valencia v Atalanta was played behind closed doors. Sevilla v Roma will be played without fans, as will Getafe v Internazionale and so, it was confirmed, will Barcelona against Napoli. La Liga’s announcement was soon followed by the Spanish Football Federation closing games in the third and fourth tiers. Postponements may well be next – a demand made by the players’ union. Schools, gyms and children’s football clubs have closed, too.



Jürgen Klopp warns Liverpool not to fall for Atlético Madrid's tricks







Read more





All over European football measures were introduced and Pep Guardiola suggested it is inevitable that the Premier League will end up doing the same. In the meantime, though, UK grounds stay open, so just before four o’clock Atlético arrived at John Lennon airport with around 100 fans. The rest followed: there were four chartered flights as well as the usual commercial routes. Tickets had sold out swiftly. This is a trip no one wanted to miss, at the stadium Fernando Torres told Saúl Ñíguez all about. “I’ve never been; it will be lovely,” says the midfielder who scored the only goal in the first leg.
Seen coldly, it might have been beneficial for Atlético had the ban arrived in time to leave Anfield empty. Much of the discussion of the second leg has focused not just on the team who stand before them but on the terraces, too. Everyone in Spain witnessed Barcelona endure what Jorge Valdano called stage fright last season. “We saw Liverpool lose 3-0 at Barcelona last year and turn it around so we know this result means nothing,” Stefan Savic said after the first leg. “We still have Anfield and we know it’s very difficult.” Atlético’s first-leg win was unexpected; their getting through would be less so now, although this weekend Koke said he “wished” he was at Liverpool’s level and insisted their recent results “won’t influence” this game.


 
 

 
 Facebook 
 
 Twitter 
 
 Pinterest 


 Atlético Madrid’s Saúl Ñíguez scores the only goal of the first leg against Liverpool at the Estadio Metropolitano. Photograph: Michael Regan/Getty
None of Liverpool’s results since then would see Jürgen Klopp’s side through, while every result Atlético have had would allow them to progress, even if they have not always convinced: a 3-1 win against Villarreal, 1-1 at bottom-placed Espanyol and 2-2 with Sevilla. At the end of that game players gathered at the south end. “The Champions League is my obsession,” supporters sang. It has hurt them before but there is hope now.
In theory, if there is any side built to hold a 1-0 lead, it is Atlético. This is the team that Kieran Trippier, fit again having missed the first leg, says he joined partly to learn how to defend – “the perfect club”. At the same stage last season they lost a 2-0 first-leg win against Juventus, although Koke says: “Hopefully that will serve as a lesson.” In Madrid Liverpool did not manage a shot on target; asked what he expects this time, Klopp said “more shots on target”. And perhaps the lesson is that it is not enough to defend.
If Atlético do score, everything changes but they have fewer than half as many league goals as Barcelona. Álvaro Morata has scored only twice in 2020 – both penalties – and did not train on Monday. Diego Costa, who played 13 minutes in the first leg and is still not fully fit after an operation on vertebrae in his neck, has only two goals all season. João Félix, missing in the first leg, has returned. A €126m summer signing, he scored against Sevilla on Saturday and is their most creative talent although he is an uneasy fit in an Atlético team still seeking the identity that was momentarily recovered in the first leg, leaving them in a strong position for Anfield.



Alisson to miss Liverpool's Atlético clash after suffering hip injury







Read more





“Today is a reminder [of what we are] and a telling-off, too: we would like to be like this all the time, as committed as we were tonight, the same sacrifice, the same focus,” Saúl said. “I’m not talking about playing good football or bad football; it’s about communicating those values. When you’re playing the champions, in a game like this, there’s an extra motivation and we’d like to compete like this in every game and every competition. We scored early and you think ‘It’s a long time’, but we resisted because we all worked, were together, and made every effort. You have to win every ball and, if you don’t, you win the next one.”
Against Liverpool the old Atlético were revived; now they must resist. Diego Simeone has always talked about going partido a partido, treating every game as if it was their last. At Anfield they will try to prevent this being their final game in Europe this year but there is nothing they can do to stop it being the last they play in front of their fans for some time to come.


Topics



Champions League






Atlético Madrid




Liverpool




features






Share on Facebook






Share on Twitter






Share via Email






Share on LinkedIn






Share on Pinterest






Share on WhatsApp






Share on Messenger








Reuse this content




 