Liverpool postpone Hillsborough memorial service due to coronavirus

The final Hillsborough memorial service to be held at Anfield has been postponed because of the coronavirus pandemic, Liverpool have announced.
This year’s service was scheduled to take place on Wednesday 15 April, the 31st anniversary of the disaster that claimed the lives of 96 Liverpool supporters, and is to be the last held at the stadium, following a decision taken by families. After the latest advice on dealing with the spread of Covid-19, the Hillsborough Family Support Group (HFSG) has agreed to reschedule the service to a later, as yet unspecified, date. People with tickets for the Anfield service have been asked to keep them for the rescheduled memorial.



Virgil van Dijk fears coronavirus could see title won in empty stadium







Read more





Margaret Aspinall, chair of the HFSG, said: “In light of recent events, a decision was made collectively by the families to postpone our final memorial service at Anfield. We wish to keep as many people safe as possible and we believe this is the right approach. We hope to provide an update in the near future on a rescheduled date for the service.
“On behalf of the HFSG, I would like to thank everyone for their understanding in this matter. I would also ask that you join us in our prayers on 15 April to remember the 96 and keep the families and everyone who has been affected in your thoughts at this difficult time.”
Liverpool, meanwhile, have donated £40,000 to Fans Supporting Foodbanks in response to the postponement of Premier League fixtures.
North Liverpool Foodbank receives approximately 25% of its donations from match-day collections at Anfield and Goodison Park and will be significantly affected by games being cancelled. Liverpool’s first-team squad and the LFC Foundation have also jointly committed to donating £10,000 per game for this season’s final four home matches to ensure the foodbank functions without match-day collections. Excess food at Melwood –Liverpool’s training ground – and Anfield will also be donated while Everton’s catering partner, Sodexo, donated more than 635kg of food intended for Monday’s postponed Merseyside derby to North Liverpool Foodbank.
Dave Kelly, chairman of Fans Supporting Foodbanks, said: “It’s incredible what they have done. Fair play to all the players, staff and supporters – the help and the assistance they’ve given us is absolutely amazing.”


Topics



Liverpool






Hillsborough disaster




Coronavirus outbreak




news






Share on Facebook






Share on Twitter






Share via Email






Share on LinkedIn






Share on Pinterest






Share on WhatsApp






Share on Messenger








Reuse this content




 