UK economy close to turning point on eve of leaving EU

Britain’s economy is close to a turning point as the country prepares to formally leave the EU after almost half a century of membership, according to a Guardian analysis of economic news over the past month.
More than three and a half years after voting to leave, the UK will formally depart on Friday with the economy close to stalling point following repeated cliff-edge deadlines and intense political uncertainty over the country’s future trading relationships with the EU and other countries.
In the Guardian’s final Brexit watch before the exit date, warning lights are flashing with zero growth forecast for the final three months of 2019 amid intense political uncertainty, rounding off the worst year for growth outside of a recession since the second world war. Speculation has been rising that the Bank of England will cut interest rates on Thursday to reboot growth on the eve of leaving the EU.
However, there are also early shoots of recovery from a surge in business confidence since Boris Johnson’s unexpected decisive election victory, which could tempt the Bank to leave borrowing costs on hold at Mark Carney’s final rate-setting meeting in charge at Threadneedle Street. Carney will stand down in March to be replaced by Andrew Bailey.
To gauge the impact of Brexit on a monthly basis, the Guardian has been monitoring eight economic indicators over the past three years, along with the value of the pound and the performance of the FTSE 100.
City economists made forecasts for seven of those barometers before the data was released, and in six cases over the past month the outcome was better than expected, raising hopes that Britain can rebound from a period of lacklustre growth.
Quick guide What happens on Brexit day and what comes next?  
 Show 
 Hide  


Does 31 January change anything?

Friday will mark the start of what is likely to be an uphill battle to get a trade deal done by the end of the year, not to mention all the non-trade issues that must also be resolved including security and intelligence cooperation, fisheries, data, education and research collaboration.
Although everyday life will remain the same and the UK will remain in the single market and the customs union until the end of the year as part of transition arrangements, the withdrawal agreement will be a legally binding international treaty that comes into force. It carries sanctions for any “backsliding or half measures”, as Michel Barnier’s adviser Stefaan de Rynck has pointed out.



What happens next?

We know little of the plans for the negotiations, and parliamentary scrutiny of Brexit has been restricted. The House of Lords EU committee has invited but failed to get Stephen Barclay to appear to explain the next stages, sources say.
While business has been clamouring for the government to reveal its Brexit vision beyond the joint aspiration of a tariff-free, quota-free deal, little is known about Boris Johnson’s specific goals.



When will negotiations begin?

Expect plenty of sabre-rattling on both sides, but negotiations are unlikely to begin before March. The European commission kicked off its 30-stage process in agreeing its negotiating goals before Christmas and these are expected to be signed off by member states at a meeting on 25 February.



Who will be negotiating for the UK?

David Frost, who replaced Oliver Robbins as the chief negotiator, is expected to lead a team of about 30 calling on expert knowledge from civil servants and trade experts. Some have suggested the government should hire as many as possible from the Canadian team that sealed Canada’s new deal with the EU. 



What about Northern Ireland?

This remains the single most contentious part of the Brexit deal because of the checks on goods crossing the Irish Sea. De Rynck said in January that the EU and the UK would have to be “very disciplined” if they were to get a new system for trading in Northern Ireland ready for 31 December.
Brussels and Irish political leaders are already alarmed by Johnson’s repeated declarations that there will be no checks on goods crossing the Irish Sea, even though some of these will be mandatory.
Helen McEntee, Ireland’s minister for European affairs has contradicted him directly, telling Sky News’s Sophy Ridge: “There will be no checks 
Northern Ireland businesses have urged the government to set up a working group urgently so that the detail of the checks can be determined quickly.
Lisa O'Carroll Brexit correspondent




Was this helpful?







Thank you for your feedback.

As the country prepares to embark on a period of intense trade negotiations with Brussels that will define the economic landscape for years to come, the gloomiest of forecasts made ahead of the Brexit vote have not come to pass. Joblessness is at the lowest level since the mid 1970s, while wage growth has accelerated to the highest levels in a decade.
However, it comes after an initial shock to the economy caused by the pound falling to the lowest point in 31 years straight after the June 2016 Brexit vote, which drove up the cost of importing goods to Britain. Inflation surged, squeezing living standards to leave the average family at least £1,500 worseoff than under a remain outcome, according to the Resolution Foundation.
Growth in the UK economy has gone from the fastest in the G7 to among the weakest, with business investment flatlining as companies put their investment plans on hold to await greater clarity over Brexit. Repeated cliff-edge Brexit deadlines triggered booms in stockpiling as firms feared disruption at the borders and higher costs of trade with the EU, distorting quarterly growth and leading to boom and bust in the economy.
In the past month, figures show consumers reined in their spending over the key Christmas shopping period, in a blow for struggling retailers, while the world economy faces fresh risks from the Chinese coronavirus outbreak. Financial markets have been rocked in the past week as fears spread over the impact on trade. Analysts fear there could be knock-on effects for UK firms, at a delicate moment after years of disruption to the UK and world economy from the US-China trade war.
However, the bright spots on the dashboard from a resilient jobs market and rising business confidence suggest Britain could be reaching a turning point. According to the consultancy Capital Economics, annual growth is set to accelerate from 1% this year to 1.8% in 2021 as the country turns a corner.
However, two former members of the Bank of England’s rate-setting monetary policy committee (MPC) warned that the tight timescale for reaching a deal with the EU that Boris Johnson has imposed could derail the recovery.

Writing in the Guardian, Andrew Sentance, who is now a senior adviser to the consultancy Cambridge Econometrics, said: “Even if economic growth does recover somewhat in the next couple of quarters, the progress of the UK economy is likely to remain sluggish in 2020.”
With inflation significantly below the Bank’s 2% target rate set by the government, David Blanchflower, another former member of the MPC, called on the Bank to cut rates to reboot the economy.
Writing in the Guardian, he said: “If CPI was above the target by a similar amount, at 2.7% the MPC would almost surely raise rates. But the target is meant to be symmetric. Doing nothing is worse than doing something and there may well be lots of bad data ahead. It is hard to see how a cut could possibly hurt. It is always best to get your retaliation in first.”


Topics



Brexit




Guardian Brexit watch






Economics




Economic growth (GDP)




European Union




Europe




Boris Johnson




FTSE




news






Share on Facebook






Share on Twitter






Share via Email






Share on LinkedIn






Share on Pinterest






Share on WhatsApp






Share on Messenger








Reuse this content




 