Britons on evacuation flight from Wuhan tell of relief and confusion

Britons who were on board the evacuation flight from Wuhan have spoken of the confusion surrounding their departure, with some still having to leave loved ones behind.
The flight, carrying 87 Britons and 27 foreign nationals from the coronavirus-hit Chinese city, touched down at RAF Brize Norton in Oxfordshire at about 1.30pm and passengers were transferred by coach to Arrowe Park hospital in Wirral, where they will be quarantined for two weeks.
The convoy of six coaches arrived shortly after 7.15pm on Friday. The vehicles were led by a police escort to the rear of the hospital and on to a side road leading to the accommodation block. A medic wearing a white specialist suit was sitting next to the driver of each vehicle.
The coach company, Horseman Coaches, said the vehicles used for the journey would be “deep-cleaned” and that the drivers who agreed to take the job will be given paid leave to “remain at home for the next 10 days”.
One of those aboard the flight was Ben Williams, who was in Wuhan for his wedding and honeymoon, and was forced to leave his wife behind.
Quick guide What are coronavirus symptoms and should I go to a doctor?  
 Show 
 Hide  


What is Covid-19?

It is caused by a member of the coronavirus family that has never been encountered before. Like other coronaviruses, it has come from animals.



What are the symptoms this coronavirus causes?

The virus can cause pneumonia-like symptoms. Those who have fallen ill are reported to suffer coughs, fever and breathing difficulties.
In the UK, the National Heath Service has defined the symptoms as:
a high temperature - you feel hot to touch on your chest or back
a new continuous cough - this means you've started coughing repeatedly



Should I go to the doctor if I have a cough?

Medical advice varies around the world - with many countries imposing travel bans and lockdowns to try and prevent the spread of the virus. In many place people are being told to stay at home rather than visit a doctor of hospital in person. Check with your local authorities.
In the UK, NHS advice is that anyone with symptoms should stay at home for at least 7 days. If you live with other people, they should stay at home for at least 14 days, to avoid spreading the infection outside the home.



Is the virus being transmitted from one person to another?

Yes. China’s national health commission confirmed human-to-human transmission in January.



How many people have been affected?

China’s national health commission confirmed human-to-human transmission in January. As of 19 March, more than 219,000 people have been infected in more than 150 countries, according to the Johns Hopkins University Center for Systems Science and Engineering.
There have been over 8,900 deaths globally. Just over 3,200 of those deaths have occurred in mainland China. Many of those who have died had underlying health conditions, which the coronavirus complicated.
More than 84,000 people are recorded as having recovered from the coronavirus.




Was this helpful?







Thank you for your feedback.

He told the BBC he found out only at the last minute that she would be allowed on the flight after a U-turn by Chinese authorities, who had initially said their citizens and dual nationals would not be allowed on. However, delays and miscommunications between embassies meant none of her paperwork was ready.
Williams said: “By the time we got out the door, it was very much a close call to get to the meeting point to get on this flight, and sadly, my wife has nothing prepared and it wasn’t right for her to enter the UK with essentially nothing.” He said he hoped to be reunited with his wife in a few months.
Matt Raw also made the flight at short notice, after initially being told that his Chinese wife, Ying, who has a visitor visa for the UK, would not be allowed to travel.
When the Chinese authorities decided to ease the restrictions, Raw was able to make the flight with his wife and 75-year-old mother, Hazel.
He said the flight was like any normal plane journey, and passengers were served chicken tikka masala. In video footage taken on the flight, he said: “It’s maybe not the best quality aeroplane food that I’ve had, but certainly this is probably one of the best meals of my life – we’re on our way home.
“There’s no beer on board. Luckily, I did see one shop in the airport that was open and I pretty much emptied the fridge of beer, so this will do us nicely.”
On Instagram, Patrick Graham showed pictures of officials in hazmat suits helping passengers check in at Wuhan airport. “Thank you, Wamos Air staff, for getting us home … They also have to go into a period of quarantine just for bringing us home!” one post said.
James Convey told Sky News the atmosphere among passengers was positive: “I think everyone was relieved to get out of China. There were a lot of obstacles for people to get on that plane … and we’re all very relieved to be back in the UK.
“It was a very tight, tight turnaround so we had an hour and a half to get to Wuhan airport. All the transport was locked down and the roads were closed, but my mother-in-law managed to call in a few favours and got someone to take us to the airport, and amazingly, we did get there on time. I think there was probably a lot of people who didn’t get there on time and possibly missed the flight.”
It was originally estimated that 150 Britons would be on the flight, but poor communication and the last-minute U-turn by China meant many did not make it.


 
 

 
 Facebook 
 
 Twitter 
 
 Pinterest 


 Anthony May-Smith with his girlfriend, Yenny. Photograph: Handout
One of those was Anthony May-Smith, 26, from Lichfield, Staffordshire, who travelled to Wuhan a couple of weeks ago to visit his girlfriend, Yenny. Although the flight was delayed to allow as many people to make it to the airport on time, May-Smith was given two hours’ notice, and had no way of getting there.
“It was pretty much impossible to get there. I’ve been trying [to find a way] for the last few days leading up to the flight, but just couldn’t find anything.”
He said the Foreign and Commonwealth Office (FCO) had been “the complete opposite of helpful” throughout the evacuation process, and offered no support or guidance on how to get to the airport. “They just said: ‘We’re sorry that you can’t make it.’”
He has been told by the FCO that a flight organised by the French is leaving on Sunday and he may be able to get a seat on that, although he’s “not holding his breath”.
Michael Gove told Sky News the government would send another plane to Wuhan to evacuate British nationals if needed. 


Topics



Coronavirus outbreak






Infectious diseases




China




news






Share on Facebook






Share on Twitter






Share via Email






Share on LinkedIn






Share on Pinterest






Share on WhatsApp






Share on Messenger








Reuse this content




 