We can’t avoid the word empire when it still shapes our world | Afua Hirsch

If I had learned about the British empire at school, I would find it easier to follow the news. I would have learned that the political struggle for Hong Kong to retain its separate identity from China has its roots as much in the British habits of opium and tea as it does in the cultural ideas of common law and democracy. I could have better understood events as diverse as Sinn Féin’s election success in Ireland, the rise and fall of Hindu nationalism in India, and the British government’s casual attitude to deporting black British people to Jamaica, all of which have their roots in Britain’s imperial history.



The government has learned its Windrush lesson – it can deport who it likes | Maya Goodfellow







Read more





For to fully comprehend such deportations one needs an understanding of how black people came to be in Jamaica in the first place, (clue: it doesn’t involve everyone’s favourite abolitionist, William Wilberforce) and how Jamaicans were later encouraged to move to Britain and become part of it. Our education system may deem such information irrelevant, yet it is always in the news. Lisa Nandy’s pledge to remove the word empire from the honours system was but the latest example. The Labour leadership candidate said that she wants the E in OBE to become “excellence”, in recognition of the fact that the empire left, for many people, a painful legacy.
That prompted the usual claim that British people – authentic, patriotic British people – would be damaged by such information. Certain commentators claim that working-class people find the prospect of discussing our recent history “anti-British”. Leaving aside the paradox that so many of those complaining about Nandy’s idea are fanatical advocates of free speech yet recoil when people speak freely about the history of empire, I’m struck by how patronising it is to suggest that working-class people (and I presume that what is meant is white working-class people, because many black working-class people have firsthand knowledge of the empire, having been born in it) don’t want to know about Britain. What should be a discussion of how we can thrive as a modern nation by understanding our past has descended into a phoney culture war fought over what is in reality supremely complex historical ground.
It is complex because there was not one British empire but many; and I’m curious to continue where my education left off. For my new podcast series, I wanted to know what it was like to be born in Hong Kong, as was Emma-Lee Moss, the half-Chinese, half-British singer who grew up in the colony and then witnessed its handover to China. Then there is South Carolina, to which the British trafficking of enslaved people from what is now Sierra Leone transferred rice-farming technology, as well as the linguistic, cultural and ethnic community of those such as Emory Campbell. His Gullah people retain a distinctive identity to this day.



Certain commentators claim that working-class people find the prospect of discussing our recent history “anti-British”

I wanted to understand how colonialism worked in Jamaica, where a young woman was recruited as a nurse in the newly created NHS as part of the Windrush generation, and would go on to defend Britain enslaving her ancestors to her British-born son: “Oh, black people, you know – we sinned against God. And as a punishment we went into slavery.” Her grandson has a view of empire that is radically different. Benjamin Zephaniah, who refused an honour that he felt glorified the system that enslaved his ancestors, told me about the ways in which his mother had internalised imperial ideology. Many of us have.
We tend to believe the empire is a black and brown story. It is not. The actor Diana Rigg – famous either as Lady Olenna Tyrell from Game of Thrones or as Emma Peel from The Avengers, depending on your age – also spoke of having never forgotten her mother’s shock at finding herself, a working-class girl from Doncaster, sitting with a basket laden with fruits at a maharaja’s palace. One of the lesser crimes of the empire is that white families such as the Riggs found themselves in some of the culinary hotspots of the world yet felt compelled by social norms and ideas of racial superiority to live on tins of Spam.
We are so convinced the empire is irrelevant that when there is a nod to its true omnipresence, such as the Sikh soldier in the Oscar-winning film 1917, this is viewed by some as an act of political correctness. In truth, it is a passing reference to the reality. About 100,000 Africans fought for Britain in the first world war, many suffering a kind of burial apartheid in death, as their bodies were dumped into mass graves while many of their white counterparts got lovingly tended headstones. A million Indian soldiers fought. Many of those who survived returned home with Spanish flu, which they had picked up in Europe. The disease killed 14 million people in India – 5% of the subcontinent’s population.
Coronavirus dominates the news, but how many people know that the globalisation of modern pandemics began with the co-opting of huge swaths of the planet into European empires? This isn’t something to celebrate, but that does not mean it is something to ignore. It shouldn’t be that difficult – for, whether we know it or not, we all have a story of empire to tell.
• Afua Hirsch is a Guardian columnist
• Afua Hirsch’s new Audible series We Need to Talk about the British Empire is out on Thursday


Topics



Race




Opinion






Lisa Nandy




Honours system




Benjamin Zephaniah




History




Windrush scandal




comment






Share on Facebook






Share on Twitter






Share via Email






Share on LinkedIn






Share on Pinterest






Share on WhatsApp






Share on Messenger








Reuse this content




 