The week in theatre: Oliver Twist; I Think We Are Alone; Women Beware Women – review

The Stage has been conducting an online survey asking whether people would stay away from the theatre because of coronavirus. The latest voting, close as a Brexit referendum, shows a majority (small sample but of ardent theatregoers) answering yes.
Absenteeism is not yet evident on press nights. There will, though, be other consequences: on the stage as well as in the auditorium. How will the coronoviral period be suggested by future designers and directors? With masks, shoulder squeezes and foot nudges? What today would an innocent eye make of Lady Macbeth’s thorough hand washing? Would she seem disturbed – or prudent?
I often catch myself underestimating the influence of silent movement and gesture on stage – in conveying a period touch, in contradicting a spoken word or in telling a truth. Until I am brought up against their power, intricately but firmly insisted on – as it is at the wonderful Chickenshed, and in Amy Leach’s production of Oliver Twist. Bryony Lavery’s stripped-back adaptation is a collaboration with Ramps on the Moon, a consortium of theatres committed to putting deaf and disabled artists and audiences at the centre of their work. Some actors use sign language, some speak aloud – some do both. Surtitles are displayed bang in the middle of the stage where anyone can see them without giving herself a neck injury. There is audio description for the visually impaired: in a programme essay, Benjamin Wilson, who is blind, laments how rotten such description often is.


 
 

 
 Facebook 
 
 Twitter 
 
 Pinterest 


 Brooklyn Melvin in the title role of Oliver Twist. Photograph: Anthony Robling
Lavery’s punchy script responds to the shaming similarities between the impoverished and abused in the London of Dickens and 2020 and puts the hero in a further circle of exclusion: this Oliver is deaf, at a time when sign language was banned in schools – in one scene his hands are tied behind his back to stop him signing. The boy famous for asking for more cannot talk aloud.
Yet, as Oliver, Brooklyn Melvin can speak with his hands. As a hearing non-signer, I watch this rather as someone who cannot hear might watch people speaking. I am aware of the delicacy of expression in these fingers, and also their force – some actors seem able to throw their hands as surely as others throw their voices. Yet I don’t understand the inflections, the intricacies. Cleverly, British sign language is made the secret argot of Fagin’s gang – presided over by a roistering Caroline Parker, got up with Vivienne Westwood swagger in spiky hair and enormous crimson dress.
The action is occasionally slowed by too much narration, but mostly moves like hyper-Dickens (with a gorgeous bull terrier puppet). The dialogue is more headline than subtlety: but the novelist painted in broad strokes, and nuance is there in those hands and the shrug of bodies. Hayley Grindle’s menacing industrial design – an iron framework with dangling cables that is both scaffold and skeleton theatre, with the screen for captions at its centre – is harsh blacks and whites, the shades of institutional life, and of negatives. The colour scheme has another purpose: its high contrasts are easily seen by the visually impaired. How beautifully these considerations feed into each other. It is a production that made me realise how much of the time a sighted, hearing audience is experiencing only two- dimensional theatre.
Dynamic physicality is the galvanic force behind the Frantic Assembly company. Its influence has rippled throughout the stage over the past 25 years: it supplied the movement direction on the National’s The Curious Incident of the Dog in the Night-time. In I Think We Are Alone, it celebrates its anniversary with an episodic show about loneliness, separation and reconciliation.


 
 

 
 Facebook 
 
 Twitter 
 
 Pinterest 


 Sally Abbott’s I Think We Are Alone. Photograph: Tristram Kenton/The Observer
Sally Abbott’s script is unerringly generous, though sometimes over-explicit. Co-directed by Kathy Burke and Scott Graham, the snippets of scenes gradually coalesce, with a cast who tumble, shin up heights and wind around one another in a perpetual dance of pain and partnership. The evening goes directly to the emotions. I sat amid rapt teenagers – their teacher explained that the school are Frantic fans – who gasped and winced and wept as the story twisted.
Strength of feeling is transmitted by Morgan Large’s design and Paul Keogan’s lighting, which flushes colourful warmth into clinical whiteness. Glass screens, wheeled around the stage like transparent, elongated hospital trolleys, divide mother and son, sister from sister. They close in on the woman who, wine bottle in hand, is struggling with childhood memories. They make smudgy silhouettes of people standing behind them, who seem to have vaporised into ghosts or fears.
I have never seen a pair of white socks do so much work as those worn by Thalissa Teixeira in Women Beware Women. Pulled over her knees, they make her look gangly as the young heroine – and yell that Thomas Middleton’s Jacobean tragedy is being transplanted to the 20th century; after her rape, one sock has slipped down round her ankle. The soaring (and finely singing) Teixeira is the main reason to see Amy Hodge’s production; she plucks reflection from an otherwise hectically knowing evening. Joanna Scotcher’s design manages with sleek economy to bring the gloss of Trump Towers to the Sam Wanamaker, but what would be startling – upskirting! – in a period production looks predictable here, and the gabble of Middleton’s plotting looks not so much threatening as incompetent. Good names, though: Sordido is a character who can move seamlessly through centuries.


 
 

 
 Facebook 
 
 Twitter 
 
 Pinterest 


 Thalissa Teixeira, left, and Stephanie Jacob in Women Beware Women at the Sam Wannamaker Playhouse. Photograph: Tristram Kenton/The Observer
Star ratings (out of five)Oliver Twist <U+2605><U+2605><U+2605><U+2605>I Think We Are Alone <U+2605><U+2605><U+2605>Women Beware Women <U+2605><U+2605>
• Oliver Twist is at Leeds Playhouse until 21 March• I Think We Are Alone is at Stratford East, London, until 21 March• Women Beware Women is at Sam Wanamaker Playhouse, London, until 18 April


Topics



Theatre




The Observer






Leeds Playhouse




Deafness and hearing impairment




Charles Dickens




Coronavirus outbreak




reviews






Share on Facebook






Share on Twitter






Share via Email






Share on LinkedIn






Share on Pinterest






Share on WhatsApp






Share on Messenger








Reuse this content




 