The Fiver | I don't agree with that in the workplace

CITY SLACKERS
We’ve all had a difference of opinion in the workplace before so let it concern no one that, following a particularly mishap-strewn early evening at the coalface, Bernardo Silva and Pep Guardiola did not quite see eye to eye. Manchester City’s performance at Old Trafford was “not acceptable”, according to the player in one of his more sensible public offerings this season. Resolutely refusing to back him up, on this occasion, was the City head coach. “I do not agree with him,” Guardiola grunted before explaining how good a toothless showing it had actually been, stopping just short of resorting to one of his newer post-big-game-defeat party tricks – outright delight.



Ilkay Gündogan on Bruno Fernandes: 'He goes on the floor, shouting'







Read more





Those two don’t have long to sort out what will or won’t be acceptable before Arsenal obligingly present themselves at the Etihad on Wednesday. A victory for Guardiola to fret over and Bernardo to rejoice in will, presumably, be the minimum requirement against a side managed by the former’s old assistant. That last fact makes the stakes pretty high given that Pep probably wasn’t banking on being bested so comprehensively over the past season by Ole Gunnar Solskjær, whose three wins in four meetings, and a first derby double for United in a decade, suggest he is very much at the wheel with Pep sitting jammed into the child seat at the back. The Baby-Faced Assassin looks, for the moment at least, like the adult in Manchester’s footballing playground; his players were certainly happy enough to let City have their ball back for 72% of the time on Sunday, safe in the assurance their own game would still wind up as the biggest show in town.
For two managers who, for all that, remain 12 points apart it is a curiosity that both will be craning their necks – Pep backwards and Solskjær hopefully into the near-distance – to see how Brendan Rodgers and his possibly-running-out-of-steam Leicester charges fare tonight. “We have an opportunity to make it a historical season,” grinned Brendan at the weekend, although they’d better get on with making sure. They can notionally still give City a go for second place but if Aston Villa repeat their Fizzy Cup semi-final heroics tonight then Ole’s eyes might just light up even further.
Let’s just hope everyone is on the same page at the end of it. The point in the season where results matter more than anything else has long since arrived but don’t breathe that sentiment within an inch of the City dugout on Wednesday night, unless an errant Bernardo has already been hauled into one of its cosy airline-style seats by then.
LIVE ON BIG WEBSITE
Join Nick Ames for red hot MBM coverage of Leicester 3-1 Aston Villa from 8pm GMT.
QUOTE OF THE DAY
Pescara players wore facemasks before Sunday’s Serie B match with Benevento “as a symbolic protest at the continuation of the Serie B league considering the tough time we are experiencing in Italy”. The referee prevented the players from keeping the masks on during the match.


 
 

 
 Facebook 
 
 Twitter 
 
 Pinterest 


 Pesky coronavirus. Photograph: @pescaracalcio/Twitter
RECOMMENDED LISTENING
Football Weekly is right here. Meanwhile, tickets are also on sale for the next live show in London.
FIVER LETTERS
“Just noticed that there were twelve matches in the National League [on Saturday’] and only one home team managed a win. Surely this is some sort of record” – John Edwards, who might want to email knowledge@theguardian.com.
“Eric Dier’s invasion of the stand has nothing on this incident from a 1979 National Hockey League game, when several Boston Bruins players leapt into the crowd at Madison Square Garden at the end of a game against the New York Rangers. Watch closely as, toward the end of the clip, Boston player Mike Milbury beats a spectator with a shoe” – John Kendle.
Send your letters to the.boss@theguardian.com. And you can always tweet The Fiver via @guardian_sport. Today’s winner of our prizeless letter o’the day is … it’s a rollover!
NEWS, BITS AND BOBS
PSG’s Big Cup second leg against Dortmund will be played behind closed doors, while all Ligue 1 games will have a maximum capacity of 1,000 as coronavirus fears spread, the French government has announced.
But there is no reason yet for ‘no reason’ yet for UK sport to follow suit, says culture secretary culture secretary Oliver Dowden.
Lucas Torreira is unlikely to play again this season after Arsenal confirmed his ankle-gah! would rule him out for eight to 10 weeks.
Ilkay Gündogan reckons Bruno Fernandes should stay up and shut up. “He goes on the floor, shouting,” parped the City midfielder.
Phil Neville has talked up “one chance, one goal” Ellen White after her decisive display against Japan at the SheBelieves Cup – and talked down the press. “I actually think there has been a bit of disrespect towards Ellen” he trilled.
STILL WANT MORE?
Ten (10, X, IIII IIIII) talking points from the Premier League. You know the drill.


 
 

 
 Facebook 
 
 Twitter 
 
 Pinterest 


 Incidentally, David Moyes, James Milner and Tanguy Ndombele are the Fiver’s dream dinner dates. Composite: Action Images/Shutterstock
Solskjær’s United showed how quick breaks are giving Pep tension headaches, laser-points floating-head-in-a-jar Jonathan Wilson. Meanwhile Barney Ronay is giving Bruno Fernandes a “that’ll do pig”-style smile.
The Rubi-made Real Betis melodrama just keeps on rolling – with Real Madrid their latest victims, parps Sid Lowe.
Serie A behind closed-doors is weird, writes Nicky Bandini, but thankfully Paulo Dybala took the time to skin Ashley Young twice in quick succession to save the day.
Kai Havertz, your time is now … and Bayer Leverkusen have a sniff at ending their trophy drought as a result, oompah-pahs Andy Brassell.
Bernd Leno gets big-thumb-up emoji from Jonathan Liew after a tidy display against West Ham.
Graham Ruthven asks why MLS suits keep banging on about it being bigger than baseball in the USA! USA!! USA!?!
Chelsea are after a new keeper. Either Dean Henderson or Marc-André ter Stegen, ta, regurgitates today’s Rumour Mill.
Oh, and if it’s your thing … you can follow Big Website on Big Social FaceSpace. And INSTACHAT, TOO!
NEV? NEV!


Topics



Football




The Fiver






Manchester City




Manchester United




Pep Guardiola




features






Share on Facebook






Share on Twitter






Share via Email






Share on LinkedIn






Share on Pinterest






Share on WhatsApp






Share on Messenger








Reuse this content




 