Madonna in full meltdown a moment to be cherished  | Rebecca Nicholson

Madonna’s Madame X era is the gift that keeps on giving. On Wednesday night, her residency at the London Palladium descended into the kind of chaos that turned it into one of those gigs you can only have dreamed of being at, like Bob Dylan at the Newport Folk Festival or the Sex Pistols at Manchester’s Lesser Free Trade Hall.
Madonna ran over the theatre’s curfew by a few minutes, so the venue turned on the lights and closed the curtain. She then uploaded a video of it to Instagram, with a caption that began: “Artists are here to disturb the peace” and ended with: “Power to the people!” You can hear her protesting: “Fuck you motherfuckers! Censorship, censorship, motherfuckers censorship.” If that doesn’t open her next album, I’ll eat my eyepatch.
I love it when it all goes wrong. I bet the audience was thrilled that they had that ticket for that night. Some of the most memorable shows I’ve ever seen have had an element of upset. I remember the Gossip, playing upstairs at a tiny pub, many years ago, having the same issue as Madonna: they overran and the sound was cut. Beth Ditto came to the front of the stage and sang, a cappella, in pure defiance, a song called (Take Back) the Revolution. I’ve seen thousands of shows and that remains one of the very best.
You can’t contrive it, either. I saw a play a couple of years ago in which the lead actors appeared to corpse, and it was genuinely delightful, until we realised days later that it was not genuine. We thought we were witnessing something fresh, off-script, spontaneous.
When I talked to relatives who had seen the same play, the exact same thing had happened and they felt special too. It didn’t matter on the night, but we’d been had. Just like Fleetwood Mac’s arena shows bringing Stevie and Lindsey together for a pointed reunion hug (when Lindsey was still there to be reunited with), it was all part of the script, after all.
The Conservative commentator Iain Dale went off-script on Good Morning Britain on Friday, when he decided not to stand his ground as he was being interrupted, but to storm off instead. “OK, I won’t speak,” he said, when being talked over, like me during a domestic about washing up. I can’t begin to process the irony of walking off a show now built entirely on talking over people – for being talked over. I realised then I only ever watch Good Morning Britain when something has gone wrong. In ratings terms, at least, wrong can so often be right.
Christina Koch: a space hero who has been well out of it 


 
 

 
 Facebook 
 
 Twitter 
 
 Pinterest 


 Nasa astronaut Christina Koch: back to Earth with a triumphant bump. Photograph: AFP Contributor#AFP/POOL/AFP via Getty Images
The astronaut Christina Koch – and my new hero – last week came back to Earth a record-breaker, having spent 328 days in space, the longest continuous spaceflight a woman has ever undertaken. Koch landed in Kazakhstan nearly a year after she left the planet and gave the cameras, staff and supporters a huge grin and a double thumbs-up.
I’ve been reading and watching interviews with Koch as a kind of balm, a self-prescribed alternative to inspirational Instagram quotes decorated with illustrations of flowers and birds. When her mission was extended, she told ABC News that that was just fine. “One of the things about the astronaut corps is we are taught to be adaptable and ready for anything in any mission that comes our way,” she said. I’ve had it printed on to a mug.
When she surpassed the previous record, set by Peggy Whitson, in December, she told CNN that we should all challenge ourselves. “Do what scares you. Everyone should think about what intrigues them and what draws them in. Those things can be scary, but they usually mean you’re interested.” That one’s getting framed and going up in the loo.
Koch’s achievements have been truly remarkable. In October she completed the first all-female spacewalk, along with Jessica Meir, though that was famously delayed when only one suit could be found that would fit a woman. Her experiences will prove invaluable to research into how long periods of time in space affect the body, particularly women’s bodies, which may well react differently to the extreme conditions. Also, having been quite literally out of this world since last March, Koch has missed coronavirus, the impeachment fiasco, Brexit, still, Australia being on fire and the USA-Iran crisis, so I’d say it was all worth it.
Dorothy Parker: her barbs still hit the target


 
 

 
 Facebook 
 
 Twitter 
 
 Pinterest 


 Dorothy Parker: queen of the acidic put-down. Photograph: Bettmann/Bettmann Archive
The collected works of Dorothy Parker will need to add a page or two, as four new poems have been linked to the great writer, almost a century after they were published anonymously.
The tale of their discovery is a detective story in itself. In the 1990s, a lawyer called Stuart Y Silverstein came across the poems in an old copy of Life magazine, thought they sounded like Parker’s work, made a copy of the page and scribbled a note – “Parker?” – at the top of it. He did not return to the paper until last year, when he managed to link it to the archive of a payment made by Life to Parker, for $50, thus authenticating the work.
It is no wonder Silverstein suspected Parker’s acidic wit. The poems are verse portraits that are entirely unforgiving of their subjects. Of the sculptor Clare Sheridan, who had turned to journalism, she wrote: “Then the lady’s interviews/ Crashed upon the daily news;/ Moan we now another lay – ‘Give, oh, give her back her clay!’”
It’s amazing how much more sophisticated put-downs sound in verse. Perhaps Twitter should start insisting that if insults are to be thrown, they should at least be thrown in rhyme.
• Rebecca Nicholson is an Observer columnist


Topics



Madonna




Names in the news






Space




Nasa




comment






Share on Facebook






Share on Twitter






Share via Email






Share on LinkedIn






Share on Pinterest






Share on WhatsApp






Share on Messenger








Reuse this content




 