'We often forget that our healthcare system is world-class': diary of a paramedic | Anonymous

04.30: Alarm goes off and my face scrunches up; is it really that time? I know I’m in for a long, busy day. That’s always a given. I work at an ambulance station in Sydney’s south-west with about 20 ambulance vehicles and more than 200 staff . We are one of many dotted around the Sydney metropolitan area.
05.30: Arrive at work 15 minutes early to check emails and clinical safety notices. These CSN’s pop up regularly and provide us evidence-based, safety-related information. We must familiarise ourselves with them. Today’s notice is about Covid-19. Increasingly they have been. I wonder if I’ll get a case today. I file that information in the back of my mind and commence pre-shift checks.



'Mayhem looms just around the corner': diary from the frontline of the coronavirus health crisis







Read more





06.00: We check the ambulance and sign on to our in-car computer, ready to respond. “Coffee?” I ask rhetorically to my work partner, Al, as we leave the station. Before we even get a whiff of beans, the radio calls us for a job. Car 288, we have a 1C breathing difficulties for you. A priority 1 job means lights and sirens. The notes drop down on our screen, a 93-year-old female can’t breathe. Not much information, we respond briskly.
06:08: We arrive at the nursing home and greet our patient. She is breathing, but with some difficulty. I have a listen to her chest, wheezy. After some oxygen and a nebuliser she has settled but must still come to hospital. “Has she had any overseas travel recently?” I ask a bemused looking nurse. “She is bed-bound,” the nurse replies. I feel silly asking but we’re expected to.
09:30: We arrive at the hospital. They’re already at capacity, in fact the waiting room is overflowing on to the footpath outside. Our case is considered “low acuity” so we must wait in the corridor with our patient on our stretcher until we’re allocated a hospital bed. I get chatting with the triage nurse. She tells me the latest from what she calls the Covid chronicles, of people coming in, sometimes with no symptoms besides fear. They are already one of Sydney’s busiest hospitals. “It’s the social media’s fault,” she says. 



Covid-19 is a big topic now. We were warned early but none of us expected it to blow up like this

09:45: Coffee in hand and paperwork completed, we’re ready to respond. The next few hours roll by as usual. A 49-year-old male with chest pain, another couple of nursing homes. Al and I talk about the job we’re on our way to, but now the chat isn’t the usual. Covid-19 is a big topic now, we’re all talking about it. We were warned early but none of us expected it to blow up like this. I feel a mild anxiety about it, enough to keep me alert but stopping short of fear. It certainly makes me feel uneasy when words like pandemic are being used. We’re running low on masks, we have protocols but they are vague, none of us know exactly what to do. Misinformation is spreading fear and we’re doing our best to remain focused on our task.
15:40: Car 288, we have a medical transfer for you. The notes drop down. It’s a medical centre: nausea, backpain, sore throat, headache. Not an abnormal job, someone just feels generally unwell. More script appears on the screen: PT works at the airport and has had symptoms for five days, doctor won’t assess patient as querying coronavirus. Frustration sets in. “Why does the doctor think it’s OK for us to assess the patient if they don’t want to?” Al laments. I agree. Our job isn’t just about turning up and taking someone to hospital, it’s never that simple. We provide pre-hospital treatment, resolve social issues, relationship problems, family disputes. People sometimes call us when they have nowhere else to turn. It’s the part of the job I enjoy the most.
But when we feel like we are being made the sacrificial lamb by doctors unwilling to provide frontline services, it grates. Don’t get me wrong, most GPs do a fantastic job keeping people out of the hospital system. But it does happen, and more often now.



'This is a mess. Put on your mask': diary from the frontline of the coronavirus health crisis







Read more





16:20: We arrive at the medical centre and are greeted by police waiting outside, telling us that they know the patient to have a “long mental health history”. By this time Al and I have donned all our protective wear – long-sleeved yellow gowns, respiratory masks, gloves and goggles. We now feel a little overdressed for the occasion. After gathering more of the story from the GP, I also suspect it’s mental health-related. But we are required to rule out an organic cause before a mental health assessment is commenced. Al is in agreement with my plan, but he is the only one. Both GP and police don’t seem impressed that I have decided to follow Covid-19 protocol. We receive the same dismissive response at the hospital by triage staff. “She’s a regular, she can go to the waiting room,” the triage nurse tells me. Deflated, we offload our patient and return to base. Sometimes it feels like you can’t win.
19:05: Back at station finishing our shift an hour late. Not too bad – it can often be more. While restocking the car, Al and I talk about the day. We both feel frustrated by the lack of cooperation between agencies but hindsight gives us some perspective. Everyone is working for the same outcome, balancing our safety with what’s best for the patient. This is where differences in opinions develop – all the guidelines in the world can’t account for differing perceptions.
This is where my concerns regarding Covid-19 lie. Our healthcare system is world-class, we often forget that. We have so many avenues to access medical assistance, from HealthDirect, which is a 24-hour advice line, to home doctors, GP clinics and, of course, the ambulance service. Call any time day or night and we’ll turn up to your front door. But the system is a complex beast, with multiple agencies and disciplines coexisting, so cooperating and collaborating is a fine balancing act at the best of times. Add something unexpected such as Covid-19 into the mix and the beast stirs.
• The author is a paramedic at an ambulance station in Sydney’s south-west
• Comments on this piece are premoderated to ensure discussion remains on topics raised by the writer. Please be aware there may be a short delay in comments appearing


Topics



Coronavirus outbreak




Opinion






Health




Hospitals




Infectious diseases




Emergency services




comment






Share on Facebook






Share on Twitter






Share via Email






Share on LinkedIn






Share on Pinterest






Share on WhatsApp






Share on Messenger








Reuse this content




 