After-work drinks by video: how to survive 100 days of solitude

We asked Guardian readers and supporters what they are doing to cope with the long hours and days of isolation that stretch ahead. Some surprisingly upbeat responses came flooding in …
David Poole




As a sport-mad family of four (two boys), the enforced limbo of Covid-19 has left us drawing lots to avoid arguments over what film or boxset to watch … but no sport. It’s tough.
So to keep teen and parental anxiety at bay, we are planning a home sporting fixtures list of our own. Two-on-two basketball, football, cricket (when the grass dries out), table tennis – it’s all happening.
Team selection will be critical.
Thank you to you and your team for your continued excellence in providing a daily window on the world. 


Rachel Chapman




It’s my brother’s 50th next week and I was supposed to be hosting the entire family to celebrate it, the weekend of 4 April, including my 91-year-old dad and 80-year-old mum. They were going to get the train from Kendal to Milton Keynes to join us.That’s clearly not happening. But I have a plan. A virtual dinner between three households. We pick our video conference provider of choice, set up a VC, coordinate dinner start times, and see whether we can have a 50th birthday celebration dinner virtually across three households.Will it work? I really hope so, I can let you know if you like. 


Ruth Coomber




I’m in social isolation as an asthmatic, so I’m still enjoying walks over the fields with our little dog and very tall son, I’ve very nearly finished my complicated knitted poncho and I’ve joined Libby, a great little app that Suffolk libraries use to give you access to the e-library. Luckily, I do usually work from home, but last week I attended my first meeting by Skype. The old hands knew to sit there motionless while I wriggled around.
Who hasn’t felt a prickle of anxiety looking at the empty shelves of supermarkets? We are well stocked, luckily, and got online orders booked. Fingers crossed things will settle down soon. 


Stella




We will trial the after-work ‘video wine’ this Thursday. A colleague suggested it and I thought it’s a great idea. Bookshelves, photographs and all in the back, us passing around the thoughts on how the first week of real corona-craziness in Germany went, more or less confined to all our homes.
It might be an idea to copy for other teams all spread out to isolated kitchens and living rooms across these cities. 


Christine Mallaband-Brown




Can I recommend joining an urban sketchers’ group and following one of the ‘drawing indoors’ challenges that are being set up? The first I knew about it was a Facebook post from Urban Sketchers in London. They had decided to do a 30-day challenge while they spend enforced time at home. After all, you only need a pen or pencil and some paper.
My branch of Urban Sketchers in Stoke-on-Trent are thinking of doing the same. 


Peter Kent




My hobby is wildlife photography, particularly insects. It never ceases to amaze me how many different insect species you can see in even a small garden if you have suitable plants and flowers.
Sometimes you see dramas playing out as predator insects move to attack their prey. I have my own safari park, but instead of seeking the big five, it’s more a case of the little five.
Last year’s photos started on 29 March, when in little over an hour I managed to photograph nine different species in my small garden. Ideally, you want an SLR and a macro lens, but you can get started with much simpler equipment.
So on any sunny day from March to October I can keep myself entertained with a garden chair, a book, a camera and a refreshing drink. I usually try to identify any unusual-looking insect and then try to read about its life cycle, some of which are truly bizarre. 


Tricia Henton




I’ve already received or have instigated communication with a number of friends with whom the odd call or email a couple of times a year was the norm. We’ve agreed to keep in touch a bit more closely over the next few weeks. Best of all, I got a letter today from a friend, a former work colleague, with whom I normally exchange an annual one at Christmas. He writes beautiful letters about where and what he and his wife have been doing, his reflections on events and other thoughts. They are a joy to read, and I reciprocate.
Good old-fashioned paper-based letter writing will occupy time, bring joy to the recipient, and provide solace to the lonely. That’s my small suggestion for helping us all maintain our sanity!
Keep up the good work. 


Elizabeth Copp




A few evenings ago I sat in front of the TV with a tray, newspaper and scissors and made paper pots. The next day, I sowed broad beans in my greenhouse, putting one bean in each pot, but you can sow them sitting at your kitchen table as well, using the rest of the newspaper to keep the table clean.
When the beans have germinated, you plant them – pot and all, for the roots grow through the newspaper – in your allotment, raised bed or garden, and when the supermarkets run out of veg you have your own supply. This method works well with peas and beetroot too.
Sowing seed is mindful, as is gardening in general, and it’s absolutely the way to go in these rather concerning times.
Today I sowed peas. 


Ninian Millar




I have just spent a really interesting day sorting through papers going back some 60 years to my graduation certificates from university in the UK and covering my entire professional career until I retired in 2005.
I have only actually worked in the UK for three years, and one delightful document I found was from the British pensions service seriously offering me a pension of 32p a week!


Sibylle Zipperer




As a teacher (and technophobe), I have had to move to remote teaching this week and decided to spice up things for my pupils (10-11 and 12-13 years old) by “reporting” via photos the adventures of Kevi the kiwi and having my friends from around the world record some lines in their respective regional dialects.
Things like this could easily be adapted for adults by sending around a story to which everyone would add a sentence or two.
A bit of silliness is rather important in this situation, which is why I am sending you a picture of Kevi. 




 
 

 
 Facebook 
 
 Twitter 
 
 Pinterest 


 Cake time for Kevi the kiwi. Photograph: Sibylle Zipperer
Hugh Busher




I’m building a WhatsApp group with some friends as we can no longer meet for our weekly French conversation group. Now we can stay in touch online and still have French-language conversations. We are members of the local U3A group. My wife is doing something similar with her art group. 


Rachel Preston




If the schools close, my plans are to go hiking with my children and meet friends and have picnics (at a distance, obvs). Get the children growing as much fruit and veg in our little garden as possible. Lots of board games, reading and seeing what we can make, using things we have lying around. Cooking and lots of rousing, feelgood movies.


Richard Harman




As a lifelong Guardian reader and German-speaking Englishman resident in Alto Adige/Südtirol for the last 16 years, I just wanted to say, “Thank you, you’re doing a fantastic job” and encourage you to keep on rising to the challenge; this reader greatly appreciates your efforts.
I have sent this article to a very good friend in Wales who is trying to persuade acquaintances with respiratory conditions to take the coronavirus seriously and stay at home – I am sure it will help her to bring it home to them.


Let us know how you are getting on. Write to theupside@theguardian.com.


Topics



Membership




The upside






Coronavirus outbreak




features






Share on Facebook






Share on Twitter






Share via Email






Share on LinkedIn






Share on Pinterest






Share on WhatsApp






Share on Messenger








Reuse this content




 