When did the right to a peerage become a matter of principle for ‘progressives’?  | Catherine Bennett

As even House of Lords reformers sometimes allow, the old place has its assets. Yes, it remains a prodigiously costly, bloated, wasteful, unrepresentative and undemocratic feeding area for greedy nonentities and certified idiots, but consider, on the other hand, its pockets of expertise.
Lord Winston’s name is usually mentioned at this point. Ditto, Baroness Greenfield, who spoke a year ago. Martin, Lord Rees. Definitely a handful of scientists among the 800 or so trough-users. How many alarmist psychologists or actual astrophysicists does the House of Commons have, in comparison? Even the 12% of peers included by reason of male primogeniture can lay claim to a brainy hereditary, Lord Ridley, professional optimist and climate emergency sceptic.
Last month, a debate on coronavirus allowed this polymath to deploy not just his scientific knowhow, but the fiscal wisdom acquired when, as chairman of Northern Rock (another inherited post), he presided over its collapse, including the first run on a British bank for 150 years. Virus-wise, Ridley said, he had a cold himself. Go figure. “If this virus does spread from man to man – sorry, person to person – there is a chance that it may reduce in virulence and it is, therefore, important to keep in perspective the warnings that we give people. While we must not underreact to this, it is also important that we do not overreact and cause major disruption to the economy.”
Nor is this sort of advanced perception limited to science and economic catastrophe. New recruit Lord Goldsmith can offer, for instance, in-depth experience of failure, first to become mayor of London, recently to keep his parliamentary seat. Where fraud and dishonesty are concerned, the House of Lords is one of the few legislatures, thanks to its ancient custom of never sacking anyone, regardless of their disgrace, whose membership usually boasts a fair number of qualified criminals.
Not only illustrious ones, such as ex-perjurer Jeffrey Archer and Lord Black of Crossharbour (albeit pardoned by Donald Trump); the Tory peers Lord Taylor of Warwick and Lord Hanningfield have both bounced back from imprisonment for expenses fraud. In fact, Lord Hanningfield, whose defence lawyer once feared a sentence would ruin his prospects, returned with rare insights on fellow inmates. “For example, general knowledge is absent in a lot of prisoners,” Hanningfield reported. “Hardly anyone had heard of the House of Lords.”
Given the random nature of Lords recruitment, the average age of promotion and the possibility that some experts might shun the opportunity to debate with people such as Ridley or David Cameron’s host of former helpers, it’s inevitable some important areas of expertise get neglected. Take workplace bullying. The reported inclusion in Labour’s new list of peerage candidates of not one but two individuals who have faced – and denied – allegations of bullying underlines how easily an organisation that prizes only the most conventional markers of success may struggle to represent the interests of the less fortunate.


 
 

 
 Facebook 
 
 Twitter 
 
 Pinterest 


 Jeremy Corbyn has been criticised for nominating his former chief of staff Karie Murphy for a peerage. Photograph: Facundo Arrizabalaga/EPA
True, both Karie Murphy and John Bercow might appear to share a strongly unappealing perspective on this social evil, but the Lords, as we have seen, are nothing if not merciful. David Leakey, the former Black Rod, who says he was subjected, as well as witness to, Bercow’s bullying, has argued that a peerage for the ex-Speaker would be “a scandal from which parliament would struggle to recover”. But even Leakey’s sympathisers would have to concede that a legislature that welcomes back disgraced financiers and unrepentant convicts, that hosts notorious creeps whose gropings would make them terminally unelectable, might reasonably disagree that Bercow, at his most ghastly, is more damaging to its dignity.
There are objections, elsewhere, to an ermine grab by Karie Murphy, Corbyn’s former chief of staff, given disturbing and extensive allegations about being aggressive in the workplace – all denied – and while the party is still being investigated over its handling of antisemitism. One former staffer told the Huffington Post: “That would be the nail in the coffin for Corbyn. He will be beyond rehabilitation if he does that, quite frankly.” Others question celebrity slimmer Tom Watson’s fitness for a title, following his important role, when deputy Labour leader, in the persecution of innocent men targeted by the malevolent fantasist Carl Beech. Understandable: but these critics must still be able to make the case that, in honouring, as alleged, unforgivable obnoxiousness and stupidity, the Lords would be doing anything other than observe hallowed tradition.
A more considered response to Corbyn’s reportedly eight-strong list should be, you could argue, WTF?? Why does it exist? Even within living memory, progressives and trade union officials, from Michael Foot to Jack Jones, disdained the Lords on principle. Jones: “I always said it was proof positive that there is life after death. It’s a totally undemocratic institution.”
For the more flexible Corbyn, an early pledge – “Labour will certainly not nominate new peers for the Lords” – mutated, somewhat less admirably, to one not to ennoble any comrades not committed to ending ennobling. At some point. And it may be, of course, that a solemn vow never to drink a glass of subsidised champagne, sworn on a copy of the 2019 manifesto, has already been extracted from the future Baroness Murphy of the EHRC.
But the inclusion of aspiring peer John Bercow on the same list suggests further relaxation. Last week, such was her eagerness to see Bercow ornamenting the Lords that Diane Abbott all but demanded to see bruises after the ex-military Leakey cited his own harassment as an argument against. “Unlikely,” she sniffed.
Perhaps the recent temporary usefulness of the Lords in thwarting Johnson accounts for this incautious amnesia about its less edifying episodes and the “fair and democratic” distribution of honours on which her leader was insistent – more or less – until at least 2016. Following Corbyn’s elevation of Shami Chakrabarti, a disapproving Tom Watson described this as “a mistake” and called for a full boycott of the honours system. If only he could now remember why.
• Catherine Bennett is an Observer columnist


Topics



House of Lords




Opinion






Honours system




Jeremy Corbyn




John Bercow




comment






Share on Facebook






Share on Twitter






Share via Email






Share on LinkedIn






Share on Pinterest






Share on WhatsApp






Share on Messenger








Reuse this content




 