David Speers finds hell has no fury like News Corp scorned | Weekly Beast

There is no one quite as invisible in the Murdoch newspapers as a News Corp operative who has stepped outside the tent.
Just ask former Sky News political editor David Speers and News Corp director James Murdoch, who became persona non grata after the former joined the ABC and the latter criticised his father’s empire for its “ongoing denial” of climate change.



David Speers finally takes a seat in the ABC Insiders chair vacated by Barrie Cassidy







Read more





There wasn’t a single request from a News Corp paper for an interview with Speers, while another ABC newbie, Q&A host Hamish Macdonald, was in hot demand.
James Murdoch’s explosive comments a month ago have still not been covered by his father’s outlets, although the Australian associate editor Chris Kenny broke the drought this week when he referred to “reported concerns about climate coverage from News Corp director James Murdoch” in an attack on News critics.
The Herald Sun’s Andrew Bolt also mentioned James’s heresy, in passing, putting his own spin on the development in his blog: “Actually, what’s extraordinary is that a board member [publicly] trashes his own product. An employee would be sacked for that.”
Kenny’s piece took aim at international media who ran “alarmist and false claims about the fires” and were unfairly critical of News Corp and Sky News. Bolt responded to Media Watch’s strong feature on climate denial at Holt St by saying, “Media Watch is run by religious maniacs, hunting heretics.”
The company’s coverage of climate change came under scrutiny from within as well this week when the executive chairman of News Corp Australasia, Michael Miller; Oz editor, Chris Dore, and managing director of the Oz, Nicholas Gray, were asked some pointed questions at a couple of “town hall meetings” with staff.
But it was left to shock jock Chris Smith, a recent hire at Sky News, to launch an unseemly public attack on Speers, inexplicably calling him a “terrible flog” on Twitter. Speers’s sin was apparently “ignoring his mates” by not mentioning Sky News on Insiders when he referred to a comment made by Peter Dutton on Sunday morning. 
News Corp revenue hits a wall
News Corp chief executive Robert Thomson has admitted a “sluggish Australian economy” has contributed to falls in revenue and profit for the December quarter.
Thomson reported from New York that the global company, which owns the Australian, Foxtel, the New York Post and the Times among many other assets, has posted a $US103m profit for the three months through December, down from $US119m in the prior year.
In the Australian market weak advertising revenues for the newspapers and declining subscriptions for Foxtel have hit hard. However there was some good news for Rupert Murdoch’s suite of Australian newspapers in the lift in the number of paid subscribers: from 460,300 to 566,000 in 12 months.
Nine’s royal ravings
Nine’s 60 Minutes is all class. A promo for its Megxit Meltdown story on Sunday night features British TV personality Trisha Goddard repeating a slur used against Prince Harry by UK media that he is “pussywhipped” by Meghan. Cutaway to interviewer Tom Steinfort laughing along. 

60 Minutes Australia 
(@60Mins)
The #Megxit Meltdown. What forced Meghan and Harry to do a Royal runner? SUNDAY on #60Mins: Why the Duke and Duchess are swapping HRH for Hollywood. pic.twitter.com/1JA7Ag2BLX

February 5, 2020

Goddard also describes the campaign against Meghan as racist, misogynistic and xenophobic. Goddard is a former host of The 7.30 Report – pre-Kerry O’Brien days – who became a talk show host in the UK and is currently appearing on Dancing on Ice in the US. The sexist term was broadcast on Channel Nine during Married at First Sight before 9pm and is still online, leaving a few viewers spluttering.



‘It’s making my eyes bleed’: News Corp's Knewz on the nose | Weekly Beast







Read more





Greens under the bed
The new Greens leader, Adam Bandt, is a monster and hard-working Aussies should be afraid, the public was told by some media outlets this week. The bespectacled 47-year-old former barrister is “anti-Australian”, an “EXTREME left-winger and anti-coal zealot”, according to the Daily Mail Australia. “Adam Bandt’s election as Greens leader will change the country as we know it.”
Sky News political editor Andrew Clennell – the journalist who replaced Speers – told Sky host Peta Credlin he knew Bandt from his “uni days” and he was very unpopular. “In fact, the Labor-right people in campus used to hate Adam Bandt, they used to think he was just too leftwing,” Clennell said. “So, he’s your classic watermelon I guess, which is a Green who’s really sort of a socialist.”

Elly Baxter 
(@ellybaxterpr)
I love how the hard-right just manages to make The Greens look cool when they attack them pic.twitter.com/ZfCuT64cFp

February 5, 2020

In the Australian the anonymous columnist The Mocker made fun of the Greens by using the fairy trope which was popular in the 1990s to describe the Democrats. “I promise to rule wisely and fairly,” declared the new King [Bandt]. “And I avow and declare that the worship of trees – particularly the Faraway Tree which grows at the centre of these woods – shall remain at the core of pixie ideology. Having said that, I am not sure what I love more: this magical tree, which bears all fruits, or the watermelons it produces.”
But it was the Herald Sun whose attempts to discredit Bandt were so ludicrous they resulted in making him look good. Andrew Bolt’s column carried art that depicted Bandt as the Incredible Hulk.

Australian Greens 
(@Greens)
When the conservatives fire up Photoshop, you know you've got them scared. Didn’t take long to spook them, did it?PS: Hey Bolt, you know the Hulk is the good guy, right? pic.twitter.com/y9l7hmzCX1

February 6, 2020

Bolt said Bandt is the “angriest, nastiest and maybe most stupid” Greens leader yet.
“That’s a big problem for us all, because this former (?) Marxist now leads a party that shares the balance of power in our Senate.
“I said Bandt is angry. That’s ugly enough, but he wants everyone else to be angry, too.”
Bolt said Bandt is a “hate preacher” for blaming Morrison for the fires. “For a start, these fires, our sixth most deadly in 100 years, were not caused by global warming, despite Bandt’s claims,” he wrote.
“Even warmist scientist Andy Pitman admits global warming does not cause drought directly. In fact, our rainfall over the past century has risen, and the area burnt by fire has fallen by a third over 20 years.”
Pitman told the Guardian in October that Bolt was misrepresenting his views.
Last question for Neil McMahon
For five years freelancer Neil McMahon has written an entertaining wrap of ABC TV’s Q&A for the Sydney Morning Herald and the Age. Every Tuesday it was one of the most popular stories on the websites of the now Nine Entertainment newspapers.

Neil McMahon 
(@NeilMcMahon)
<thread> So here is my final weekly look at @QandA. My wrap has been canned after running every week for five straight years ... the first one appeared on February 3, 2015. https://t.co/Y1rnJ2f5N3 #qanda

February 3, 2020

On Friday McMahon was told he would write his last column on Monday, about the debut of new host Hamish Macdonald. Sources say the decision was a cost-cutting move by the entertainment editors. Correspondents in Canberra will now take turns writing the weekly Q&A wrap.
Blair’s new low
The Daily Telegraph columnist Tim Blair has a reputation for writing tasteless blog posts about his many targets, but his repeated mocking of the name of former race commissioner Tim Soutphommasane is a new low.

Michelle Stephenson 
(@MishStephenson)
I would like to think this was a simple autocorrect issue from Tim Blair in the @dailytelegraph - otherwise it's just blatant racism #hisnameisTimSoutphommasane #notcool ping @ABCmediawatch pic.twitter.com/9CuwpWl1Eg

February 6, 2020

In a recent post about the coronavirus, Blair referred to the professor as “race hustler Tim Sudafednasalspray”. This was just the latest slur from Blair, who has also called the academic Dr Superpuffin, Dr Sweetpeahummusstain, Dr Soupinacan and Dr Souscheffromparis.

Tim Soutphommasane 
(@timsout)
Thanks to all who’ve spoken out against racism. Most Australians agree it’s no laughing matter. When newspapers try to smear the work of anti-racism as being a “race hustler” or “race baiter”, it shows what we are up against. We must always stand up to hate, bigotry and prejudice pic.twitter.com/TibYkt0OFB

February 6, 2020

The Daily Telegraph editor, Ben English, who last week apologised for his headline “China kids stay home” by saying it “was in no way intended to single out Chinese people”, did not respond to a request for comment. Taking their cue from Blair, some of the readers’ comments on the post are similarly offensive.
Today flicks the switch to vaudeville
With Karl Stefanovic back on the Today show couch after a year’s break, Nine is trying to improve the breakfast show’s ratings – which are trailing behind Sunrise on Seven – with some pretty desperate tactics. Stefanovic and co-host Allison Langdon have been fronting promos to give away a house: “One lucky viewer is going to travel to Melbourne and will walk away with the great Australian dream: a house and land package, and a new lifestyle. It’s unbelievable. With one turn of a key, someone’s life is going to change forever.”

The Today Show 
(@TheTodayShow)
Breakfast television is about to get juicy! <U+0001F602> #9Today pic.twitter.com/w1jpVsuTbg

February 3, 2020

But now they’ve flicked the switch to vaudeville with a promo in the style of Silence of the Lambs with Stefanovic as Hannibal Lecter and Langdon as Clarice.
“I’ve missed the smell of morning coffee,” Stefanovic says. “Apparently I’ve been a very naughty boy.”


Topics



Australian media




The weekly beast






News Corporation




James Murdoch




Australian Broadcasting Corporation




Sky News Australia




comment






Share on Facebook






Share on Twitter






Share via Email






Share on LinkedIn






Share on Pinterest






Share on WhatsApp






Share on Messenger








Reuse this content




 