The spread of super-specialisation is an alarming problem of modern medicine | Ranjana Srivastava

“Here, I’ll put him on the phone,” says my exhausted friend before I can beg off. He is in hospital with a serious illness and I have taken pains to be her friend and not his doctor, but after two long weeks she doesn’t care for boundaries.
To him, I say the most obvious thing: “You sound like you’re in pain.”
“No one can help me.”
At this, my hackles rise. With a mix of friendly concern and professional knowledge and wanting to say just enough but not too much, I urge: “You must speak up.”
There’s a pause. “And who would I tell?”
“Your doctor,” I say, resisting a tone of exasperation and then feeling immediately relieved when he innocently asks: “And can you tell me who that would be?”



'Greedy specialists' charging exorbitant fees a major cause of private health's strife







Read more





And then it dawns on me. His three tubes, a nasogastric, a drain, and a urinary catheter are managed by three different surgeons. The infectious diseases physician is running the antibiotics. The nephrologist is juggling the fluid balance. The rehab physician says it’s not yet time for rehab. Six specialists visit the man and yet he is looking for a doctor.
The spread of super-specialisation at the cost of whole-patient welfare is an alarming problem of modern medicine. Doctors are required to define a scope of practice, which is broadly linked to a field of expertise. For instance, an oncologist cannot deliver babies, or a surgeon administer chemotherapy. A general practitioner must refer out for a gastroscopy and a radiologist may not provide a clinical prognosis. These restrictions protect patients from exuberant and overly confident doctors of all kinds who might think there is nothing special about specialisation.
Many years of training in a speciality has its obvious benefits, which is why people turn to an ankle surgeon, an asthma specialist or a dementia expert. At the same time, there is nothing about any scope of practice that precludes doctors from assessing the whole patient and making a decision based on a thorough history and examination and a sound understanding of physiology and pharmacology – something all doctors learnt in medical school.
So why is it that the modern physician prefers to manage just one organ and a surgeon wants to operate on one type of bone? Why is it that the narrower the speciality the greater the prestige when the average patient with multiple chronic conditions desperately needs someone to heed the big picture? And what happens to all those nurses, residents and trainees who find themselves caught on the horns of a dilemma – whether to blindly follow a subspecialist’s lead and treat the organ in isolation or listen to their instincts and care for the human being? I am afraid it has become increasingly challenging to do the latter.



Patients yearn for the able generalist, yet society rewards the niche specialist

Once, clinicians were more willing to have robust discussions with each other about all sorts of issues from diagnosis and management to end of life care. Curiosity, broad knowledge, and an interest in ideas beyond one’s specialty were considered a mark of maturity and wisdom. I will never forget a gastrointestinal surgeon giving a lucid lecture on the pathophysiology of renal failure that wowed my whole class. Or the intensive care physician who educated a patient about all the complications of cardiac surgery in front of the surgeon who said he couldn’t have put it better. Or the urologist who told a relieved woman that based on her history and where she hailed from, he was certain that the mass in her bladder represented not cancer but tuberculosis, a curable condition. Today, each of these doctors might be considered overreaching. There is a quaint term for doctors who look beyond one problem: “old-fashioned”. 
But how did this happen? A reasonable explanation is that medical knowledge is bursting at the seams and it is impossible to keep up. If one can barely remember the indication for 20 new cancer drugs, what incentive is there to know about the newest insulin? If I am never going to perform a hip replacement myself, why should I bother discussing it at all?
But another explanation is that in defending their own expertise, doctors have managed to devalue each other. When my GP friend called obstetrics, the response began with: “Why are you managing this pregnancy?”, requiring a seasoned GP to explain to a trainee that she had a diploma in obstetrics. A senior radiologist who asked reasonable questions to prevent unnecessary imaging was chided for pretending to be a bedside clinician. A young surgeon interested in end of life care was dismissively told to leave it to the experts.
Opining from our silos, when we began ribbing our colleagues, “What would you know about this?”, we didn’t realise that eventually we would reach a point where doctors would begin to doubt our own capabilities and say: “What would I know about this?”



The whistleblower doctor who fell victim to China's coronavirus







Read more





Consequently, invaluable technical crafts such as repairing a fracture or inserting a stent have become conflated with the greater mission of medicine, which is to serve the whole patient. But in relegating ourselves to the role of technicians in service of an organ, we diminish the capacity of intelligent and well-educated doctors to hold more than view, be interested in more than one aspect of the body and contemplate the welfare of all of society which includes the patients we will never see. Patients yearn for the able generalist, yet we reward the niche specialist.
I have been thinking about the role of broad intellectual curiosity in the context of the coronavirus outbreak and the widespread remorse for the plight of the young Chinese doctor who was the first to raise the alarm about a cluster of infected patients. It is now well known that he was humiliated by the authorities and forced to withdraw the “rumour” but what is less well appreciated is that Dr Li Wenliang was an ophthalmologist.
What would an ophthalmologist know about a virus? Indeed, he could be forgiven for both knowing nothing and saying nothing. But as it turns out, he had the vanishing quality of realising that he had come across a problem he couldn’t ignore even if it had nothing to do with the cataracts and glaucoma he was paid to treat. Deigning to cross another’s turf: in the ever-narrowing corridors of modern medicine, this would be a brave move anywhere. In China, it could have permanent consequences.
Li contracted the virus from an elderly glaucoma patient. He lived to witness the unimaginable impact of his courageous call but tragically not long enough to see the birth of his second child. At age 34, he had achieved that rare status in modern medicine of an “old-fashioned” specialist who thought beyond one organ,cared about people who were not his patients and indeed, about broader society. The best tribute his profession could pay him is to reflect on how each one of us could carry his flame a little bit further.
• Ranjana Srivastava is an Australian oncologist, award-winning author and Fulbright scholar. Her latest book is called A Better Death


Topics



Doctors




Opinion






Health




Hospitals




comment






Share on Facebook






Share on Twitter






Share via Email






Share on LinkedIn






Share on Pinterest






Share on WhatsApp






Share on Messenger








Reuse this content




 