Coronavirus 6 March: at a glance

Key developments in the global coronavirus outbreak on Friday include:
Global number of deaths surpasses 3,400
According to the Johns Hopkins University Center for Systems Science and Engineering, 100,686 people had been confirmed as having been infected as of Friday evening. Of those, 3,411 have died.
Containment is the world’s highest priority, the WHO says
All countries should make containing the outbreak of Covid-19 their top priority, the World Health Organisation (WHO) said. The UN agency stressed that fighting the epidemic required countries to work together and praised Iran for “switching on” to the coronavirus outbreak there and taking a fresh “all-of-government approach”.
49 more people in Italy died
Local authorities reported 49 new deaths on Friday, as well as 778 new infections. That brought the total number of deaths to 197, with 4,636 patients.
Second British death feared
There were concerns the virus had claimed its second victim in the UK after a man died at Milton Keynes University hospital on Friday. The patient had tested positive to one of two tests that confirm the illness. A second test was due to be carried out.
UK cases see single largest day-on-day increase
Department of health and social care figures showed 163 confirmed coronavirus cases in the UK; an increase of 47. That is the greatest nominal increase since the outbreak began. The department said more than 20,000 people had been tested for the virus.
The prime minister, Boris Johnson, said it looked like the UK would face substantial disruption and pledged a further £46m for research into a vaccine.
Two British Airways staff tested positive
The airline said the pair have been isolated and are recovering at home. A temple in Watford, Hertfordshire, has closed after a member of the congregation tested positive with coronavirus, according to a statement on its website.
The US president claimed the virus would just go away
Donald Trump, who has previously called the outbreak that has claimed more than a dozen US lives a “hoax”, has said it will simply “go away”. Trump said the US had relatively few cases and claimed that was because the nation had been “very strong at the borders”.
Iran threatened use of force to limit travel
Local authorities warned they may use force to limit travel between cities, as the country reported 1,234 new cases of the coronavirus in the past 24 hours, a huge jump that takes the confirmed total to 4,747.
First death in the Netherlands
An 86-year-year old man infected with the coronavirus died on Friday, the Netherlands’ first known fatality, its <U+200B>national <U+200B>health <U+200B>institute said.
First case in Vatican City
The city state reported its first coronavirus case. The spokesman Matteo Bruni said the discovery was made on Thursday and that outpatient services in Vatican clinics had been suspended to saniti<U+200B>se the areas.
Stock markets tumble
In London, the FTSE 100 closed down 242 points, or 3.6%, at 6462, its lowest close since 2016, with US indices also heading for big falls by Friday afternoon in New York.


Topics



Coronavirus outbreak




Coronavirus: at a glance






Italy




Iran




Vatican




Stock markets




Netherlands




British Airways






Share on Facebook






Share on Twitter






Share via Email






Share on LinkedIn






Share on Pinterest






Share on WhatsApp






Share on Messenger








Reuse this content




 