Coronavirus: Australian doctors report 'unacceptable' shortages of protective equipment

Frontline doctors are still reporting “hugely concerning” supply issues with personal protective equipment due to the coronavirus epidemic, despite the government’s attempts to boost supply.
The federal government’s advice to general practitioners, emergency doctors and other health practitioners dealing with possible coronavirus patients is that they must wear gowns, gloves, eye protection and a P2/N95 respirator.



Australia coronavirus live: all cricket cancelled as NSW government announces $2.3bn stimulus package – latest updates







Read more





But medical groups have voiced concern about the availability of personal protective equipment (PPE), particularly respirators, which were in high demand during the bushfire crisis.
Last month, the government announced it would open up the national medical stockpile – an emergency holding of medical equipment – as part of its emergency response to Covid-19.
The Guardian now understands some state governments are also moving to shore up their own stocks of PPE.
Quick guide Coronavirus advice for Australia  
 Show 
 Hide  


What are the common symptoms of Covid-19?

Fever
Dry cough
Fatigue
Muscle aches and pains 



When should I get tested?

The current national advice is to get tested if you:
are experiencing the symptoms above, and
have travelled overseas recently (within the past 14 days); or
have been in close contact with a confirmed case of Covid-19



Help lines

The national coronavirus health information hotline is 1800 020 080.The federal health department has a coronavirus health alert website. 
The state health department websites and contact numbers are:
NSW – 1300 066 055
Victoria – 1800 675 398
Queensland – 13 HEALTH or 13 432 584
South Australia – 1300 232 272
Western Australia – 1300 62 32 92
Tasmania – 1800 671 738
ACT – Business hours: 02 5124 9213, after hours: 02 9962 4155
Northern Territory – 08 8922 8044




Was this helpful?







Thank you for your feedback.

The Victorian government is preparing to spend $10m to purchase an extra 100m gloves, 10m masks and 1.5m gowns, on top of whatever it receives from the federal government.
The state government is also helping domestic companies to ramp up local production to help it boost PPE supplies and said it stood “ready to receive stock from Canberra and distribute it on a needs basis”.
“We are working with the sector and commonwealth government to identify important equipment and consumables and establish supply chains,” a Victorian Department of Health spokeswoman said.
But both the Australian Medical Association and the Royal Australian College of General Practitioners are continuing to receive reports from GPs about dwindling stocks of PPE.
The RACGP president, Dr Harry Nespolon, said the reports were “hugely concerning” for GPs, who were on the frontline attempting to contain the Covid-19 pandemic.
“Some of them are frustrated and the RACGP is listening,” Nespolon told the Guardian. “We will stay on top of this because shortages of masks, gowns, gloves and eyewear are unacceptable at any time.”
Nespolon said the federal government’s decision to open up the emergency stockpile and secure an additional 54m face masks was welcome, but that “we are not out of the woods yet”.
“The government needs to remain vigilant in ensuring that equipment is reaching all corners of the country and GPs need to stay in close contact with their primary health networks to see what supplies are available.”
The AMA’s federal council issued a communique on Tuesday saying the “health, safety, and wellbeing of all healthcare workers must be prioritised to maintain healthcare delivery capacity”. It said access to PPE was “still inadequate” and must be resolved urgently. It recommended:
“Measures to ensure essential services and health service providers are adequately stocked and properly trained in the appropriate use of PPE must be an urgent priority.”
The AMA South Australia president, Chris Moy, told the Guardian the lack of PPE continued to put pressure on frontline medical staff.



Coronavirus tests being rushed to Australia can deliver results within three hours







Read more





“It’s a massive issue,” Moy told the Guardian. “We’re going to be limited in our ability to test.”
Health minister Greg Hunt said the government was examining “different options” to boost production of masks and other equipment. Hunt said the government was “ramping up our domestic production of critical supplies”.
“I’m also pleased to indicate that we’ve been able to support our testing process for this with a large volume of masks. 230,000 new P2 masks, which will support the testing process, have arrived in Australia today and will be shared with states and pathology providers, and general practices who are taking samples around the country,” Hunt said.
Stephen Duckett, the Grattan Institute’s health director, said stocks of PPE were being moved quickly to GPs. Duckett sits on the board of one primary health network and said it had distributed 40,000 surgical masks and 16,000 P2 masks to 95% of the practices within its area.
“We started delivering it within 24 hours of the boxes getting to us,” he said. He was concerned about deep-cleaning capacity as the pandemic continued, he said.
Other states and territories did not respond to questions about their stocks of PPE. The AMA has previously criticised a lack of coordination between jurisdictions on their coronavirus response.


Topics



Coronavirus outbreak






Health




news






Share on Facebook






Share on Twitter






Share via Email






Share on LinkedIn






Share on Pinterest






Share on WhatsApp






Share on Messenger








Reuse this content




 