UK local newspapers unite in coronavirus pledge to communities

Local newspapers across the UK have come together to publish the same front page pledging to support their communities during the coronavirus outbreak, although the dire financial impact for the news industry has alreadyforced some outlets to close their print editions.
Dozens of papers owned by rival regional publishing groups, ranging from the Birmingham Mail and the Scotsman to the Huddersfield Examiner and York Press, used their Friday front pages to pledge: “When you’re on your own, we are there with you.” 
Newspapers run by publishers including Archant, Reach, JPI Media, Newsquest and Iliffe also ran the same editorial under the banner: “You have been there for us through the toughest of times. We want you to know that your newspaper will be there for you now.”



Coronavirus UK: how many confirmed cases are in your area?







Read more





Readers were told in the shared editorial that local reporters would be looking to highlight positive deeds and give accurate advice during the crisis, through both their print and online editions: “We know that for you, having a constant feed of reliable news and information that you trust is vital, and this is our commitment to you: whatever happens, we will be there for you. There to help you make sense of the situation. There to steer you towards any help you might need. There to offer reassurance and a calm, steady hand.”
Sales of local newspapers have collapsed in recent years, and in common with the rest of the economy they face an uncertain financial future. Many smaller local newspapers were already operating on a skeleton staff even before the crisis, and were relying on limited advertising from local businesses, much of which is now expected to dry up completely. They are, however, still among the most trusted forms of media in the UK, particularly among older people, who are some of the most at risk of suffering severe symptoms if they contract the virus.
There are also concerns about the logistics of distributing newspapers if the country moves toward a full lockdown, especially if elderly readers are advised to stay at home rather than go to the shops.
Traffic to news websites has reached unprecedented levels – MailOnline’s is up by 50% – but online advertising cash used to pay wages is under threat as the economy grinds to a halt and marketing spend is put on hold.

The independently owned free London newspaper City AM, which distributes 90,000 copies a day to financial workers in the capital, became the first paper to cease publication as a result of the pandemic. Its staff were told on Thursday night that the outlet, which relies on income from advertising and being picked up by commuters, would go online-only for the foreseeable future.
All staff have been asked to take a 50% pay cut to keep updating the website. This has placed many already low-paid junior reporters in a financially precarious position, but staff said they were likely to stick with the publication because there were few opportunities elsewhere during the crisis.


Topics



Coronavirus outbreak






Regional & local newspapers




Newspapers




Newspapers & magazines




news






Share on Facebook






Share on Twitter






Share via Email






Share on LinkedIn






Share on Pinterest






Share on WhatsApp






Share on Messenger








Reuse this content




 