Rough sleepers and drug users not getting coronavirus advice

More than a quarter of a million vulnerable people including rough sleepers and drug users are missing out on vital advice on how to handle the coronavirus threat, placing lives at risk, experts have warned.
Charities said people living in unregulated supported housing, homeless hostels and temporary accommodation were not receiving key information from public health authorities.
The warning came as one of London’s biggest operators of night shelters, Glass Door, revealed that it refused to admit a rough sleeper it feared might be carrying the virus amid a lack of official guidance. He was sent away and slept in railway stations.
The organisation, which provides dormitory-style night shelters for rough sleepers, refused access to a homeless man at the end of last month because he had been in northern Italy, Inside Housing magazine reported.
The charity said that it helped the man dial 111 and the NHS operator said he must not share sleeping quarters with other people.
Glass Door said it had been asking the government for three weeks for specific guidance on how homeless people at risk of coronavirus can self-isolate.
“Staff at the shelter had no other choice but to ask the guest to leave,” said Megan Preston, the charity’s coronavirus lead. “We urge the government to offer a solution – such as some form of safe temporary accommodation where a homeless person can self-isolate.”
Dr Nell Munro, a social welfare specialist at the University of Nottingham law school, said charities and housing associations were not receiving targeted information on infection control for people who were likely to be more vulnerable because of underlying physical and mental health problems.



People without secure housing 'particularly vulnerable' to coronavirus







Read more





“Some residents, especially those with pre-existing health needs, will be particularly vulnerable in the event of infection,” she said in a report published on Friday. “We need to ensure providers [of shelters and temporary housing] are urgently targeted with appropriate information and local authorities are given additional resources to increase frontline capacity.”
Housing Justice, an umbrella organisation for night shelters run by churches, said its members were confused about how to help people self-isolate.
“We have received a number of requests from winter night shelters for advice on how to respond to the coronavirus and particular concerns around how their guests self-isolate,” said Kathy Mohan, chief executive. “It is absolutely clear that there needs to be firm advice from Public Health England for organisations working with people experiencing homelessness as a matter of urgency.”
Lucy Abraham, Glass Door’s chief operating officer, had previously said that turning people away without an alternative safe space “seems inhumane and potentially risky for public health”.
Public Health England said advice would be coordinated by the Ministry of Housing.
“We’re well-prepared to deal with the potential impacts of coronavirus and are already working closely with local authorities to support vulnerable groups including homeless people,” said a spokesperson for the ministry. “We’ve announced a £500m hardship fund so local authorities can support economically vulnerable people and households and we will publish further guidance for hostels and day centres shortly.”
Steven Pettican, who runs Light Project Peterborough, which has night and day shelters for rough sleepers, said it was not yet screening people coming in for the night.
“If somebody needs to self-isolate and has nowhere to do that, for the good of all of us they need to be given priority housing,” he said. “The alternative is they are on the streets or in the community.”


Topics



Coronavirus outbreak






Homelessness




Drugs




Social exclusion




Social care




University of Nottingham




Voluntary sector




news






Share on Facebook






Share on Twitter






Share via Email






Share on LinkedIn






Share on Pinterest






Share on WhatsApp






Share on Messenger








Reuse this content




 