Juventus defender Daniele Rugani tests positive for coronavirus

The Juventus defender Daniele Rugani has tested positive for coronavirus, the Serie A club said on Wednesday.



Europa League thrown into coronavirus chaos as two last-16 ties are shelved







Read more





“The footballer, Daniele Rugani, has tested positive for coronavirus-Covid-19 and is currently asymptomatic,” Juve said in a statement. “Juventus Football Club is currently activating all the isolation procedures required by law, including those who have had contact with him.”
Rugani has made seven appearances for Juventus this season – the last being in the 2-1 win against Spal on 22 February – but was an unused substitute for Juventus on Sunday in their behind-closed-doors victory against Internazionale. Rugani was also seen training with the first team on Tuesday (pictured below, second right).

Leonardo Bonucci 
(@bonucci_leo19)
It’s time to be strong <U+0001F4AA><U+0001F3FB> #LB19 #FinoAllaFine pic.twitter.com/9J1uvEsDRI

March 10, 2020

Inter responded to the Rugani news by suspending “all competitive activities”, which includes training.
“Following Juventus FC’s announcement that their player Daniele Rugani has tested positive for Covid-19, FC Internazionale announce that all competitive activities have been suspended until further notice,” a statement read. “The club is currently taking steps to put all the necessary procedures into place.”



Coronavirus Q&A: latest on Premier League, Euro 2020 and the Olympics







Read more





Inter’s Europa League tie against Getafe, originally scheduled to take place on Thursday, had already been suspended. The Getafe president, Ángel Torres, had admitted before the Rugani news broke that the Spanish club would refuse to travel to Milan even if it led to their expulsion from the competition.
Juve are due to take on Lyon in a Champions League quarter-final second leg next week, with European and internaional competition excluded from Italy’s domestic ban on all sport until 3 April.
The news of Rugani’s condition could throw more pressure on Uefa to rearrange Juventus’s match with Lyon, with several Europa League matches already affected by the outbreak of the virus.


Topics



Juventus






Coronavirus outbreak




Serie A




European club football




news






Share on Facebook






Share on Twitter






Share via Email






Share on LinkedIn






Share on Pinterest






Share on WhatsApp






Share on Messenger








Reuse this content




 