How to protect Australia's most vulnerable people from coronavirus

For those who are most at risk of severe illness from the coronavirus, it can be distressing to see the oft-quoted figure that 80% of people who contract Covid-19 experience only mild symptoms.
Some people who are in vulnerable groups, or caring for people who are, have suggested they may go into preventative isolation to protect themselves and their family from a broader community that does not appear to be taking the threat seriously.
We asked an infectious diseases expert if that was a recommended approach.
Who is at greater risk from Covid-19?
The groups with the highest risk of serious illness from Covid-19 are the elderly, people with suppressed immunities, and people with relevant co-morbidities.



So you think you have coronavirus: what Australians should do if they are unwell







Read more





Data from China’s national health commission shows that 80% of deaths were in people aged over 60, and 75% of people who died had preexisting health conditions. The risk increases for people aged over 70, and again for people aged over 80.
People with chronic health conditions – heart disease, kidney disease, liver disease, chronic respiratory disease, diabetes, hypertension – are also at higher risk, as are people with suppressed immunity.
In severe cases, the World Health Organisation says, the infection can cause pneumonia, severe acute respiratory syndrome and kidney failure. These can cause death. The three people who have died after testing positive for Covid-19 in Australia were aged over 70.
Quick guide Coronavirus advice for Australia  
 Show 
 Hide  


What are the common symptoms of Covid-19?

Fever
Dry cough
Fatigue
Muscle aches and pains 



When should I get tested?

The current national advice is to get tested if you:
are experiencing the symptoms above, and
have travelled overseas recently (within the past 14 days); or
have been in close contact with a confirmed case of Covid-19



Help lines

The national coronavirus health information hotline is 1800 020 080.The federal health department has a coronavirus health alert website. 
The state health department websites and contact numbers are:
NSW – 1300 066 055
Victoria – 1800 675 398
Queensland – 13 HEALTH or 13 432 584
South Australia – 1300 232 272
Western Australia – 1300 62 32 92
Tasmania – 1800 671 738
ACT – Business hours: 02 5124 9213, after hours: 02 9962 4155
Northern Territory – 08 8922 8044




Was this helpful?







Thank you for your feedback.

Should people who are vulnerable go into preemptive isolation?
No, says Australian National University professor of infectious diseases Peter Collignon. At least, not yet.
“At this point in time, today [12 March], the risk of getting it in the community is still very low,” Collignon told Guardian Australia. “That may be different next week or the week after. My advice to people today is, there are risks from isolation too.”
Australia has, so far, had very low rates of community transmission, Collignon says. Strategies of detection and containment broadly appear to be working. If that changes, a more aggressive approach to containment may be warranted.
“At the moment the risk here is much lower than if you lived in Italy,” Collignon says.
“That may change in a week or in three weeks time. But it’s not reasonable for people to become hermits for the next year. We don’t know how long this is going to persist.”
It is possible, says Collignon, that the virus will not peak in Australia until the winter flu season.
He says people should continue to go about their lives with a reasonable level of precaution, proportionate to the current risk. If a person is in an at-risk group, or caring for someone who is, he says they can practice social distancing rather than going into full home isolation.
What is social distancing?
Social distancing is one step back from home isolation. It means you avoid gathering where there are likely to be large groups of people, stand at least one metre away from people who are showing signs of being sick or who have recently travelled overseas, and generally pull back on non-essential mingling.
Both the Victorian and New South Wales governments have indicated they might move to cancel mass gatherings, or close schools, if the spread of community transmission necessitates those kind of containment measures.



Coronavirus Australia: Labor calls for mass events to be cancelled and schools closed







Read more





The most important advice for people who face a higher risk of a serious illness from Covid-19, and people caring for others in those groups, is to wash their hands frequently and distance yourself if you become sick.
Surely it’s about more than washing your hands?
When it comes to protecting people from getting the virus, washing your hands (with soap and warm water for at least 20 seconds) and not coughing or sneezing on people is the best defence.
Collignon says if you are in a vulnerable group or caring for someone who is, the most important advice is to wash your hands frequently and clean any surfaces they might tough with a disinfectant that kills viruses, like an alcohol wipe.
If you are unwell – whether your illness is confirmed to be Covid-19 or not – stay at least one metre away from people and ensure the vulnerable person has a separate bedroom and bathroom, if possible.
Another way to protect vulnerable people in the community is to ensure that healthy people do not overwhelm the public health system.
Unless you have been overseas or in contact with someone, you do not need a test for Covid-19
To date Australia has kept on top of demand for testing of Covid-19, Collignon says.
Australia’s chief medical officer, Professor Brendan Murphy, said this week that there had been a number of people seeking testing for Covid-19 who did not need to be tested and that was “putting an unnecessary burden” on the health system.



Coronavirus facts: is there a cure and what is the mortality rate of the virus?







Read more





Murphy says the only people who need to be tested are people with cold or flu-like symptoms who have travelled overseas within the past 14 days, or been in contact with a confirmed case in the past 14 days.
He there was “no value” in testing people who do not have respiratory symptoms because that could produce a false negative result.
Unless rates of community transmission accelerate in Australia, testing people outside that narrow group for Covid-19 is an unnecessary clog on the system, Collignon says. That could affect the early detection and control of other cases.
“Everybody who has a sore throat does not need the test,”he says. “If the system is overwhelmed then we risk the cases that have a high risk not getting seen.”
If you think you may have coronavirus, contact your state or territory health department, call your GP, or find your closest respiratory clinic.
Reader callout
The Guardian would like to hear from people who may be at risk of developing serious illness from Covid-19. If that includes you and you’d like to share your experiences, please fill out the form below.

If you’re having trouble using the form, click here . Read terms of service here.


Topics



Coronavirus outbreak






Health (Australia news)




Infectious diseases




Health (Society)




explainers






Share on Facebook






Share on Twitter






Share via Email






Share on LinkedIn






Share on Pinterest






Share on WhatsApp






Share on Messenger








Reuse this content




 