Myanmar has zero coronavirus cases, claims Aung San Suu Kyi

The porous Myanmar-China border stretches more than 1,400 miles but coronavirus cases have only been reported on one side.
In China, more than 80,800 people have been infected, but according to Aung San Suu Kyi, Myanmar’s civilian leader, the country has not yet seen a single confirmed case.
“Until now, no one in our country is infected with Covid-19,” said the country’s civilian leader, Aung San Suu Kyi, in a televised address on Monday.
To the country’s west, 114 coronavirus cases have been confirmed in India and five in Bangladesh. Myanmar’s southern neighbour, Thailand, has reported 114 cases.
Attempting to explain the anomaly, a spokesperson for Myanmar’s government has claimed that people’s “lifestyle and diet” protected them from the disease – stoking concerns the country is downplaying the impact of the respiratory illness.
Zaw Htay, a government spokesperson, also said the common use of cash instead of credit cards, helped curb the spread of the illness. There is no evidence to show that diet or banknotes can stop the spread of coronavirus.
“Such irresponsible statements clash with everything known about the coronavirus outbreak, defy reality, and only serve to give a false sense of security to the country’s people about the disease and their risks of infection,” said Phil Robertson, deputy director of the Asia division at Human Rights Watch, in a blog post.
Ten patients in Myanmar are currently in quarantine awaiting test results, according to the government.
Globally, there are more than 161,500 confirmed coronavirus cases in 150 countries or territories. The World Health Organization said the global threat from the respiratory illness is high.
“The government’s public lack of concern has sparked rumours and speculation about the government’s response, leaving many distrustful and unable to make informed decisions for their families,” Robertson said.
Aung Aung, a surgeon at Mandalay general hospital in Myanmar, told the New York Times: “I don’t think Myanmar has the modern techniques to know whether the virus is here.”
Facing questions from reporters, Zaw Htay acknowledged scepticism about the government’s claim there are no coronavirus cases in the country, but insisted it was accurate.
Even without any reported cases, the government has banned festivals and entertainment events in April, including the Thingyan festival, the biggest annual holiday in the country.
The government has also started a fund to raise money from the public to support its response to the illness.
“I urge those of you who would like to donate to give as much as you can,” said Aung San Suu Kyi.


Topics



Myanmar






Coronavirus outbreak




Aung San Suu Kyi




South and Central Asia




China




Bangladesh




news






Share on Facebook






Share on Twitter






Share via Email






Share on LinkedIn






Share on Pinterest






Share on WhatsApp






Share on Messenger








Reuse this content




 