'It's really irresponsible': pop stars criticise fans over coronavirus inaction

Billie Eilish, Taylor Swift and Ariana Grande are among the pop stars using their considerable clout with fans to appeal for behavioural change during the coronavirus outbreak.
Eilish delivered a five-minute Instagram story to her 57 million followers, saying: “I’ve seen a lot of young people out in the world, all over the place, going to the club or going to the beach or just going out and hanging out, and it’s really irresponsible.” She highlighted that young fans could pass it to more vulnerable relatives, and added: “Please take responsibility for your endurance of this.”
Swift spoke to her 128.2m Instagram followers to say: “I love you guys so much and need to express my concern that things aren’t being taken seriously enough right now … I’m seeing lots of get-togethers and hangs and parties still happening. This is the time to cancel plans. Don’t assume that because you don’t feel sick that you aren’t possibly passing something on to someone elderly or vulnerable to this.”
On Sunday, Grande wrote to her 72m Twitter followers: “I keep hearing from a surprising amount of people statements like ‘This isn’t a big deal’… it is incredibly selfish and dangerous to take this situation that lightly. The ‘We will be fine because we’re young’ mindset is putting people who aren’t young and/or healthy in a lot of danger. You sound stupid and privileged and you need to care more about others. Like now.”

Ariana Grande 
(@ArianaGrande)
please pic.twitter.com/N9WkKyVNn1

March 15, 2020

US singer Camila Cabello said: “Especially as young people, even if we are healthy, it’s important to practice compassion and help others that could be suffering. We are in this together, let’s not be indifferent to others’ risk.” She advised her 48m Instagram followers to practise meditation to help quell any anxiety.
Their appeals come as other music stars have been criticised for going ahead with concerts during the crisis. Welsh indie band Stereophonics played a series of arena concerts over the weekend, attracting tens of thousands of fans, and defended the decision by saying: “The UK government’s position was that at this phase there was no need for a ban on large public gatherings. Acting on this guidance, we continued with the last three shows of our UK tour on Friday, Saturday and Sunday, as did many other events across the entertainment industry.”


 
 

 
 Facebook 
 
 Twitter 
 
 Pinterest 


 Music stars including Lewis Capaldi, pictured performing in London last week, have been criticised for going ahead with concerts. Photograph: Burak Çingi/Redferns
Scottish pop singer Lewis Capaldi used the same reasoning for playing an arena concert after Scotland announced the cancellation of large-scale events but before the ban came into force.
A spokesperson said of the Scottish government’s advisory document: “The advice applies from Monday March 16, and is ‘not expected to have a significant impact on the spread of Covid-19, and this is not its purpose’, but that it aims ‘to relieve pressure on public services, including emergency services’. Security, first aid, medical and welfare teams were paid for by the organisers as normal and the venue had additional signage in place to highlight best practice on hygiene during the event.”
Tens of major tours have been cancelled, including those by Elton John, Foo Fighters and Celine Dion.
Stars are now looking to livestreaming as an alternative. Coldplay frontman Chris Martin took to Instagram Live yesterday to perform his band’s songs as well as a cover of David Bowie’s Life on Mars. “Maybe 9/11 was the last time I felt like we were all together,” he said.
The performance was part of a new initiative from the World Health Organization and Global Citizen called Together, at Home. John Legend is the next performer lined up for the series.


Topics



Music






Pop and rock




Billie Eilish




Taylor Swift




Ariana Grande




Camila Cabello




Stereophonics




news






Share on Facebook






Share on Twitter






Share via Email






Share on LinkedIn






Share on Pinterest






Share on WhatsApp






Share on Messenger








Reuse this content




 