Family of Manchester coronavirus victim pay tribute to 'gracious gentleman'

The family of a talented 88-year-old church choir singer who died after catching coronavirus have appealed for acts of kindness to be carried out in his memory.
Darrell Blakeley, who died on Friday evening at a Manchester hospital, is thought to have been infected following contact at a restaurant with someone who had recently returned from a skiing trip to Italy.
The pensioner, among 35 coronavirus deaths in the UK, fell ill with sepsis following the meeting earlier this month and was placed in quarantine because of his contact with the skier – however, he initially tested negative for Covid-19.
While in isolation last Tuesday he subsequently tested positive for the virus and became “extremely poorly” before dying on Friday, according to a Facebook post by the CoE church he had attended for half a century.
St Michael’s Church, in Alkrington, Manchester, paid tribute to Blakeley, describing him as a “gracious gentleman” who “sang in the choir with a beautiful voice”.

A separate post shared on behalf of Blakeley’s family on Sunday read: “We invite you to forget flowers and cards. Instead we would like you to give acts of kindness.
“Help someone who is lonely or struggling during this time, who needs shopping, childcare or a chat. Post tiny acts of kindness given and received and share. Build something beautiful in Darrell’s memory.”
The family’s appeal comes after dozens of “mutual aid” groups have sprung up across the UK, offering practical support to those in need as a result of the pandemic. As the government is expected to ask over-70s to self-isolate within weeks, volunteers are organising WhatsApp and Facebook groups, as well as holding meetings online alongside distributing flyers in the street offering help.

An earlier post by Blakeley’s church explained he had been unwell for several weeks. It said: “Unfortunately, he came into contact briefly at a restaurant with a skier who had returned from Italy. He became poorly with his underlying condition shortly afterwards and was admitted to NMGH [North Manchester general hospital] on Tuesday March 3 with sepsis.
“Because of his contact with the returnee from Italy he was placed in quarantine but tested negative for the virus. On Tuesday March 10, still in isolation, he tested positive, became extremely poorly and died late last night (March 13).
“Darrell was a faithful man at St Michael’s for over 50 years, he sang in the choir with a beautiful voice, described by so many as a gracious gentleman who is going to be sadly missed. RIP Darrell.”
The number of confirmed coronavirus cases in the UK topped 1,300 on Sunday. So far, it is understood all of those who died after testing positive to the virus in the UK had underlying health conditions.
Tributes were paid on Sunday to Nick Matthews, a retired police officer from Somerset, who is thought to be the youngest victim to the pandemic in the UK after he died aged 59 following a positive test.




Topics



Coronavirus outbreak






Infectious diseases




Manchester




Greater Manchester




news






Share on Facebook






Share on Twitter






Share via Email






Share on LinkedIn






Share on Pinterest






Share on WhatsApp






Share on Messenger








Reuse this content




 