Boris Johnson details raft of new coronavirus measures at PMQs

Boris Johnson has detailed a raft of new measures to tackle coronavirus including help for renters and enhanced sick pay, and has said there will be an imminent decision on school closures.
He used prime minister’s questions, which was attended by far fewer MPs than usual and who sat further apart from each other, to thank everyone who has worked in schools, but hinted that changes were to be expected soon.



UK coronavirus live: schools in Scotland and Wales to close from Friday







Read more





Johnson said: “Of course we will do everything we can to remove burdens on schools and Ofsted is one in particular we can address. The house should expect further decisions to be taken imminently on schools and how to make sure we square the circle of making sure we stop the spread of the disease but also making sure we relieve, as much as we can, pressure on our NHS.”
Johnson also suggested a number of significant changes would come into force to help the lowest paid after a series of questions from the Labour leader, Jeremy Corbyn, the Commons leader of the Scottish National party, Ian Blackford, and other MPs.
A temporary universal basic income is among the measures being considered, it has emerged. After being asked twice about it, Johnson said: “Of course that is one of the ideas that will certainly be considered.”

Asked by Corbyn if he would increase levels of sick pay beyond £94 a week because it was inadequate to feed a family, Johnson replied: “In addition to the package of business support that the chancellor outlined yesterday, we will be working with the unions, working with colleagues across the house. We will be bringing forward further measures to support workers of all kinds throughout this crisis.”
For those on zero-hours contracts who do not get statutory sick pay, Johnson has said that issue is also being considered.
He said: “Of course we will ensure nobody is penalised for doing the right thing protecting themselves and other members of society. Since the state is after all making demands of the public and of business it is only right we should be doing whatever it takes to support the workers of this country throughout this crisis.”
Quick guide What to do if you have coronavirus symptoms in the UK  
 Show 
 Hide  

Symptoms are defined as either:
a high temperature - you feel hot to touch on your chest or back
a new continuous cough - this means you've started coughing repeatedly
NHS advice is that anyone with symptoms should stay at home for at least 7 days.
If you live with other people, they should stay at home for at least 14 days, to avoid spreading the infection outside the home.
After 14 days, anyone you live with who does not have symptoms can return to their normal routine. But, if anyone in your home gets symptoms, they should stay at home for 7 days from the day their symptoms start. Even if it means they're at home for longer than 14 days.
Information: If you live with someone who is 70 or over, has a long-term condition, is pregnant or has a weakened immune system, try to find somewhere else for them to stay for 14 days.
If you have to stay at home together, try to keep away from each other as much as possible.
After 7 days, if you no longer have a high temperature you can return to your normal routine.
If you still have a high temperature, stay at home until your temperature returns to normal.
If you still have a cough after 7 days, but your temperature is normal, you do not need to continue staying at home. A cough can last for several weeks after the infection has gone.
Source: NHS England on 18 March 2020




Was this helpful?







Thank you for your feedback.

Corbyn also raised the concerns of renters worried about looming evictions if they no longer received a wage. There are currently 3m rented households in the UK with people who have children.
Johnson said he would bring forward legislation to protect private renters from eviction and would look into scrapping section 21 no-fault evictions.

Corbyn’s spokesman said Labour expected that the government would move to close schools.
The Labour leader, 70, attended PMQs in person despite the guidance being that those in his age bracket should consider social distancing.
His spokesman said the advice from government for the over-70s had not been clear.


Topics



Coronavirus outbreak






PMQs




Boris Johnson




Infectious diseases




House of Commons




Health




Renting property




news






Share on Facebook






Share on Twitter






Share via Email






Share on LinkedIn






Share on Pinterest






Share on WhatsApp






Share on Messenger








Reuse this content




 