How will club cricket survive the coronavirus crisis? | Barney Ronay

The doomsday clock ticked a little closer to midnight for cricket’s summer of 2020 when the England and Wales Cricket Board announced on Wednesday that all recreational cricket should be suspended indefinitely.
A letter from the chief executive, Tom Harrison, to county boards, clubs and leagues said the decision was based on medical guidance.



County Championship under threat if domestic cricket season is curtailed







Read more





“Following the Government’s latest advice around social distancing, it is with sadness and reluctance that we recommend that all forms of recreational cricket are for now suspended.”
This will come as no surprise given the staged lockdown of all public activities. Earlier this week the Football Association advised that all levels of the amateur game be suspended. The Rugby Football Union has advised similar suspension in amateur and junior rugby. The ECB’s move is just further confirmation of the potentially disastrous state of amateur and grassroots sport in coming months.
The crisis is a visitation that extends far beyond sport, just as the decision to suspend non-professional cricket is unarguably the right course. The MCC’s 1901 touring party to South Africa may have played a Test series during a local outbreak of bubonic plague but the Covid-19 pandemic requires industrial scale micromanagement.
The question remains, though: what will be left when it passes? Club cricket in particular finds itself in considerable peril, placed directly in the path of the coming lockdown. This is a sport where the annual revenue stream runs from April to September, where mid-season will coincide with the expected peak-infection period in England.
Quick guide Jimmy Anderson: 'we might not bowl a ball this summer'  
 Show 
 Hide  

James Anderson admitted he is unsettled by the coronavirus pandemic which the England seamer fears could lead to the domestic and international summer being scrapped altogether.
The County Championship is supposed to get under way on 12 April but a potential rescheduling of the season will be discussed by the England and Wales Cricket Board and the 18 first-class counties on Thursday.
“Cricket and sport is not the be all and end all but it is my livelihood, it’s all I know,” Anderson, speaking on the BBC’s Tailenders podcast, said. “The season is unlikely to start. It’s still a little bit hazy as to what’s going to happen. There’s a chance we might not even bowl a ball this summer. I feel a little bit anxious. Just the not knowing is giving me a bit of anxiety.”
Anderson, 37, made the last of his 151 Test appearances against South Africa at Cape Town before a broken rib led to him missing the last two matches of the series. He was overlooked for the Sri Lanka trip in order to continue his recovery with a view to being fully fit for the start of the English summer.
Meanwhile, Ben Stokes has revealed the abdominal issue which led to him being withdrawn from England’s tour match in Sri Lanka was caused by a blow to the midsection during batting practice. He has now recovered. PA Media



 Photograph: Jacob King/PA Archive




Was this helpful?







Thank you for your feedback.

Much of the hand-wringing over sporting cancellations has focused on how industries that are essentially drowning in money will fulfil their televised fixtures. In the shadow of this, community sports clubs that fill the role of social hub, physical activity centre and entry point to children’s sport are set to lose their sole source of income.
It is extremely likely many will be forced to close if no alternative can be found. Most clubs rely on the standard input of match fees, fundraisers, annual membership and the club bar, with junior cricket in particular a regular source of cash and new members.
At the same time iIt seems inevitable school sport will also now be suspended. Following the ECB’s advice would mean the English Schools Cricket Association’s entire summer fixture list is affected. All county age group, borough and district cricket is in peril. The Bunbury festival must be looking on anxiously.



Cricket's criminal streak and the curious case of the Lord's forger







Read more





The potential loss should be judged not just in revenue to clubs but in those who will support, play and watch the game in the future. One club committee member said: “Since the ECB announcement I have been inundated with concerned messages from clubs and community facilities used by clubs. They all face financial ruin without cricket income. These are pillars of the community and we cannot forget those low-income seasonal workers who rely entirely on the income from coaching and ground work over the summer.”
“Clubs were telling me they were planning on doing numerous one-to-one and small group coaching activities. With the message to cease all cricket-related activities, all bets are off. What troubles me most is that junior cricket, the financial lifeblood of the game, could be salvaged with some imagination.”


 
 

 
 Facebook 
 
 Twitter 
 
 Pinterest 


 Players line up for official launch of the Hundred last October. The new competition, expensively assembled for this summer, is surely in danger of cancellation amid the coronavirus outbreak. Photograph: Charlie Crowhurst/Getty Images for ECB
Who will stand against this? The obvious first port of call is the ECB, whose articles of association state that its role is to “be responsible for the organisation, promotion and fostering of cricket” and “to support and assist the recreational game”.



Cricket's criminal streak and the curious case of the Lord's forger







Read more





The ECB acknowledged the importance of clubs in its statement on Wednesday and announced some understandably vague plans to “support some levels of physical activity in communities – particularly at junior levels.”
“We understand that countless hours of work from thousands of volunteers have already gone into getting ready for the 2020 season and we know how disappointing this will be. We are thankful for the huge role that volunteers play in local cricket, to ensure the game remains at the heart of communities.
“We know that you and your clubs can play an important role in bringing your community together once we get past this period of time.”
Notably absent from these warm words is any promise of financial support in the form of emergency grants or loans. More worryingly still, this is also understandable.


The Spin: sign up and get our weekly cricket email.
The ECB has made much of its commitment to investing in grassroots cricket. To date its most profound investment has been in the Hundred, a new competition designed for an as-yet undiscovered audience, which now finds itself threatened with a disastrous cancellation in its first season.
The ECB was criticised by some for accumulating large reserves of cash and sitting on them. It was criticised by others for spending that cash on the gaudy new investment. As clubs up and down the country contemplate a future with no obvious income source, that expense starts to look like a doomed high-stakes gamble at the most unfortunate of times.


Topics



Cricket






ECB




Coronavirus outbreak




The Hundred




features






Share on Facebook






Share on Twitter






Share via Email






Share on LinkedIn






Share on Pinterest






Share on WhatsApp






Share on Messenger








Reuse this content




 