Coronavirus latest: 18 March at a glance

Key developments in the global coronavirus outbreak today include:
Global number of confirmed coronavirus cases reaches 200,000
The number of coronavirus cases around the world has tipped over the 200,000 mark, according to the Johns Hopkins University global dashboard.
Iran reports single biggest jump in deaths from coronavirus
Iran reported its single biggest jump in deaths from the new coronavirus on Wednesday, saying that a further 147 had died in a nearly 15% increase that raises the death toll to 1,135 people nationwide. So far, 17,361 people having been infected nationwide.
Iran’s president, Hassan Rouhani, defended his government’s response to the coronavirus outbreak on Wednesday, after facing widespread criticism that officials acted too slowly and may have even covered up initial cases before infections rapidly spread across the country.
In a speech to his cabinet, Rouhani said the government was “straightforward” with the nation, saying it announced the outbreak as soon as it learned about it on 19 February. “We spoke to people in a honest way. We had no delay,” he added.
The Iranian government finally closed religious sites and mosques this week after weeks of criticism. “It was difficult of course to shut down mosques and holy sites, but we did it. It was a religious duty to do it,” Rouhani said.
It comes as a report from Iran’s Sharif University states that if Iranians did not cooperate with government guidelines the outbreak is likely to peak in June and cause 3.5 million deaths.
Belgium locks down
Belgium is the latest country to go into lockdown, with citizens asked to stay at home and limit contact to their closest family.
From noon local time (CET) on Wednesday, all non-essential shops and open-air markets closed and people will be expected to work at home. Employers who require staff to be on site but cannot ensure social distancing face fines and even closure.
Coronavirus cases in France increase by 1,097 in 24 hours
The number of coronavirus cases has risen in France to 7,730, an increase of 1,097 in 24 hours.
“There have been 175 deaths, an increase of 27 in a day,” Jérôme Salomon, director of the French health authority, said, adding that 7% of those infected were under 70 years old. Of the sick, 699 are in intensive care, but 5,000 patients have recovered or are being treated at home. There are 2,575 patients still in hospital, but more than 600 people have been successfully treated and allowed to go home in the last 24 hours alone.
Qantas grounds 150 aircraft
The Qantas Group has announced it is slashing international capacity by 90% and domestic capacity by 60% until the end of May.
The cuts will be phased in from the end of this month with routes to be affected announced within the next few days. The move will mean 150 aircraft will be grounded, including most of the wide-body fleet.
UN agencies: refugees will no longer be resettled in safe countries
Two UN agencies have announced refugees will no longer be resettled to homes in safe countries, as the world battles the Covid-19 crisis.
In a joint statement, the UN refugee agency (the UNHCR) and the UN migration agency (the IOM), said refugee resettlement would be suspended as “a temporary measure that will be in place only for as long as it remains essential”.
As more countries have introduced travel restrictions and frozen refugee resettlement programmes, the two agencies had little choice. They also raised concern that international travel could increase the exposure of refugees to the virus.
First deaths in sub-Saharan Africa, Bangladesh reported
Burkina Faso has announced its first death from coronavirus, which is also the first known fatality in sub-Saharan Africa, according to AFP Africa.
Bangladesh also reported its first death from the novel coronavirus while 14 patients are infected with the disease across the country, according to officials.
Meanwhile, the Central Epidemic Command Center in Taiwan announced 23 new confirmed Covid-19 cases in the country, as the country banned all foreign nationals from entering Taiwan from Thursday.
UK’s Glastonbury festival postponed
Glastonbury’s 50th anniversary celebrations will not go ahead this year in the UK, after organisers announced they would be postponing for a year because of coronavirus fears. The BBC also suspended the filming of many long-running dramas, including EastEnders, Casualty and Holby City, while supermarkets applied restrictions on shoppers to limit stockpiling.


Topics



Coronavirus outbreak




Coronavirus: at a glance






Infectious diseases






Share on Facebook






Share on Twitter






Share via Email






Share on LinkedIn






Share on Pinterest






Share on WhatsApp






Share on Messenger








Reuse this content




 