Sharp rise in number of coronavirus cases in West Midlands

The government is investigating a sharp rise in the number of coronavirus deaths in the West Midlands, with one of the region’s NHS trusts reporting nine deaths from the illness, the highest number for any trust in the country.
The UK health secretary, Matt Hancock, confirmed the government was looking “very, very closely” at why a hotspot seems to have emerged in the region, where 28 deaths have been recorded so far. The majority of deaths have been of elderly and at-risk patients.
Hancock said: “There is a hotspot, not as big as in London, but there is a hotspot in the Midlands. It’s something that we’re looking at very, very closely to find out why, frankly.”
Coronavirus hotspots in Uk
London has so far been the area of the UK with the highest number of cases; the latest figures show the number of infected people in the capital has risen to more than 1,220, and there have been 56 deaths.
However, a large cluster of deaths were identified in the West Midlands on Thursday; the latest mortality figures from NHS England revealed three neighbouring trusts had recorded 21 deaths between them arising from a coronavirus infection.
The Royal Wolverhampton Trust reported nine such deaths, the highest number for any trust in the country. The Dudley Group Foundation Trust recorded seven deaths, while Sandwell and West Birmingham Trust reported five deaths. Walsall Healthcare Trust also recorded one death.
This rise in the number of deaths accounts for 16% of the national total in England – more than recorded in any one of the seven NHSE regions, apart from London, which has 44% of the country’s total.



Coronavirus UK: how many confirmed cases are in your area?







Read more





Thirty-two deaths have been recorded for the entire Midlands region. The south-east has 16 recorded deaths. The four remaining regions have had 23 deaths between them.
The Health Service Journal reported that several sources have said the region’s pathology services are allegedly struggling to keep up with demand for coronavirus tests, leading to delays in results being received. It is not clear whether these delays in testing have been attributed to the sharp increase in deaths.
Hancock said it was normal for there to be a particular density of cases in some areas.
In the interview with Sky News, he added: “The spread of a disease like this does tend to be in areas of hotspot and then broadening out from them. What we’ve got to do … is to respond as well as possible.”



Topics



Coronavirus outbreak






Infectious diseases




NHS




Hospitals




Health




news






Share on Facebook






Share on Twitter






Share via Email






Share on LinkedIn






Share on Pinterest






Share on WhatsApp






Share on Messenger








Reuse this content




 