Coronavirus latest: at a glance - 14 March

Key developments in the global coronavirus outbreak today include:
China: cases imported exceed homegrown
China has been at the centre of the outbreak since the virus was first detected in November, and still has the highest number of confirmed cases and deaths, at 80,801, and 3,176 respectively. However, figures released from the country’s national health commission reveal that the number of cases brought in from abroad has exceeded those infected domestically for the first time, indicating that China’s role in the crisis may be diminishing.

The World Health Organization questions UK response
The WHO spokeswoman, Margaret Harris, has cast doubt on the UK’s decision to take a herd immunity response to the coronavirus outbreak. Harris told BBC Radio 4’s Today: “We don’t know enough about the science of this virus, it hasn’t been in our population for long enough for us to know what it does in immunological terms.” She warned that each virus functioned differently, implying it was difficult to tell if the herd immunity approach would be effective in this case.
Jet2 suspends flights to mainland Spain, as well as the Balearic and Canary Islands
The low budget airline said the move came in response to “local measures introduced throughout Spain to prevent the spread of Covid-19, including the closure of bars, restaurants, shops and activities”, as these measures would impact holidaymakers in the destinations. The airline said it was contacting customers who were planning to travel, or currently doing so, amid reports some flights in transit had been turned around mid-air.
India counts coronavirus as a notified disaster
This step will enable the country to take greater steps to combat the spread of coronavirus, including drawing on the state disaster response fund. The country currently has recorded 82 confirmed coronavirus cases and two affiliated deaths.
Austria announces €4bn (£3.6bn) aid package
Austria will make a €4bn aid package available to deal with the economic impact of coronavirus, Sebastian Kurz, the chancellor, and Werner Kogler, the vice-chancellor, said on Saturday. The package was designed to provide “fresh blood” for the economy, including bridge loans and credit guarantees for businesses.
Quarantined Italians have been singing from their balconies
Italian citizens in lockdown, trapped in their homes, have been seen sitting on balconies and singing together to support one another during the national quarantine. Some have brought musical instruments to create the spontaneous shows of solidarity, which have occurred across the country.
Ivanka Trump ‘working from home’ after coronavirus contact
US officials have confirmed that the president’s daughter has been working from home “out of an abundance of caution” after she met the Australian home affairs minister, Peter Dutton, who later tested positive for coronavirus. Dutton also met the US attorney general, William Barr, who is also staying clear of the White House. Neither is showing symptoms.
Europe now the centre of virus, WHO says
“Europe has now become the epicenter [sic] of the pandemic, with more reported cases and deaths than the rest of the world combined, apart from China,” the WHO director, Tedros Adhanom Ghebreyesus, tweeted on Saturday. He urged countries to take all available action, warning that “we are at a critical point”.
Czech Republic to ban foreigners
From Monday, foreign travel will be banned and foreigners will be barred from entering the country. Most shops and restaurants will shut for 10 days, but food stores, pharmacies, banks, post offices, gas stations and takeaway food establishments will be exempt from the closures.
The global number of confirmed cases stands at 146,742, with 5,526 deaths
As of today 71,715 people have recovered, according to Johns Hopkins University. The institution runs a live tracker of coronavirus cases, based on official figures, meaning that the true figures may be somewhat higher.


Topics



UK news




Coronavirus: at a glance






Coronavirus outbreak




William Barr




news






Share on Facebook






Share on Twitter






Share via Email






Share on LinkedIn






Share on Pinterest






Share on WhatsApp






Share on Messenger








Reuse this content




 