Coronavirus solitude? Podcasts to binge on while you're social distancing

These stories are designed to offer practical advice, provide some entertainment, foster a sense of social cohesion, and remind people of the good in the world during these strange and isolating times.
13 Minutes to the Moon: the wondrous things people can do
The BBC World Service’s 13 Minutes to the Moon is guaranteed to take you to a different time and place from where we’re at right now. And it’s also a reminder of what a determined community inspired by a great leader can do. There were 13 minutes from when the Apollo 11 lunar lander detached from the mother ship to when it landed on the moon’s surface. The podcast takes you through, in detail, those 13 minutes, with original audio, new interviews and archived interviews from many of those who were there. There’s original music, too, from the great Hans Zimmer – and even a bonus episode all about the music.
Start from the beginning! The second series that looks at the doomed Apollo 13 mission is just out. – Graham Readfearn, environment reporter

The Jungle Prince of Delhi: another kind of exile



Your coronavirus reading list: reader suggestions to bring joy in difficult times







Read more





Was it an urban myth or was it real? Generations of journalists heard the story from rickshaw drivers, fixers, tea-sellers. The story was that in the forest in the city limits of Delhi, cut off from the world, lived a prince, a princess and a queen. They were said to be the last of a distinguished Shia Muslim royal line. Before moving to the crumbling forest palace, they had taken up residence in the first-class waiting room of the Delhi railway station. While in exile at the station, they demanded that their lineage be recognised.
Ellen Barry, a New York Times journalist, unpicks this wild and at times unsettling story with great care and sensitivity in the three-part series for the Daily, The Jungle Prince of Delhi. It sounds like folklore but by episode three it becomes deeply political. In the end it’s a story of family, homeland, dislocation, trauma and the damage done by Partition. And at its conclusion, it had me weeping. – Brigid Delaney, columnist

WeCrashed: what goes up must come down
This is the story of coworking juggernaut WeWork and its cult-like founder and former CEO, Adam Neumann, who took the company from living room start-up to blockbuster valued at $47bn – before hubris sent it into a massive nosedive. This six-part series is a truly fascinating insight into the charlatans and grifters of the business world, from “disruptor” disciples to “unicorn” hunters, and the way it all thrives on hot air. As with all good tales of downfall, the best place to start is the beginning. – Stephanie Convery, deputy culture editor

The Cut on Tuesdays: like a conversation between your smartest girlfriends
Its host Molly Fischer has now left the show, but while she was at the helm, The Cut on Tuesdays provided 48 bingeable episodes of well-reported, feminist, funny discussion from topics ranging from the very heavy (what it’s like to be a woman in a migrant caravan) to the light and effervescent (what it means to be horny in 2019). This show listens like a conversation between your smartest girlfriends, who just so happen to be very good journalists. It sounded like everything female-focused media should be, but often isn’t. Start with the episode about pubic hair for a chat that’s often had in private, made public, or Welcome to my Bad Dinner Party, for a cooking challenge with a difference, made even tastier by the wisdom of Samin Nosrat. – Alyx Gorman, lifestyle editor




Coronavirus: Australian arts industry calls for 'emergency support package'







Read more





Dying for Sex: love in a time of cancer
Molly is diagnosed with stage IV breast cancer, leaves her unhappy marriage of 15 years and embarks on a series of sexual adventures – then sits down in a studio and tells her best friend Nikki all about it.
Start from episode one, but episode two is when you’ll be clutching your sides laughing and/or dying of embarrassment. It’s a great reflection on what it means to feel alive, even when death is just around the corner. – Ellen Leabeater, audio producer
What are your favourite binge-worthy podcasts that won’t make us worry about the world? Tell us about them in the comments


Topics



Podcasts




The good place






Coronavirus outbreak




Infectious diseases




features






Share on Facebook






Share on Twitter






Share via Email






Share on LinkedIn






Share on Pinterest






Share on WhatsApp






Share on Messenger








Reuse this content




 