Coronavirus 3 March: at a glance

Key developments in the global Coronavirus outbreak today include:
The total number of cases so far:
The global death toll exceeded 3,100, while more than 90,000 people have been infected in 73 countries and territories.
Mainland China, excluding Hong Kong and Macau, has 80,026 cases, including 2,943 deaths. In Italy, Europe’s worst-hit country, the number of deaths hit 79. In Iran 77 people have died and 2,336 have been infected.
UK publishes contingency plan: 
Police and fire services might respond only to major incidents if their staff fall ill, the British government said in a key planning document outlining how ministers were preparing for an escalating outbreak of the virus. The number of confirmed cases in the UK is 51.
Graphic
US death toll rises to nine:
Health officials in the US, where more than 100 cases have been confirmed, said the death toll from Covid-19 rose from seven to nine people on Tuesday, all of them based in Washington state. Donald Trump signalled he was considering additional travel restrictions into the US to try to contain the spread of the virus.
Spain sees first death
The first coronavirus death in Spain has been confirmed, according to a Valencian health official. The man died nearly three weeks ago and tests now show he was killed by the virus, the regional health chief Ana Barcelo told a press conference.
France to requisition stocks of face masks:
The French president, Emmanuel Macron, has said authorities will requisition all existing stocks, and future production of, face masks in the coming months to help combat the outbreak.
Canada asks travellers from Iran to self-isolate:
People arriving in Canada from Iran are being asked to self-isolate for 14 days, even if they are not experiencing symptoms. Canada has 27 confirmed cases and many have been linked to the Iran outbreak.
2020 Olympics at risk: 
Doubt was cast on the viability of the games as Japan’s Olympics minister said the contract to organise them left open the possibility of delaying the events until later in the year. The International Olympic Committee said the games would go ahead as planned, however.
China asks overseas citizens to reconsider travel plans:
Chinese authorities, meanwhile, have asked overseas-based citizens to reconsider or minimise their travel plans as the coronavirus epidemic prompts a rise in cases arriving in the country. China’s death and infection rates continued to fall.

Australia hopes containment is working:
Australia’s chief medical officer, Brendan Murphy, said his teams were concentrating on containment, but that – despite two suspected cases on Monday – there was no evidence of sustained community transmission.
Global community take steps to protect economies:
The world’s finance ministers and central bankers have pledged to do what they can to protect the global economy from the fallout from coronavirus. That could include extra government spending or changes to monetary policy, such as interest rate cuts or more asset purchase programmes.


Topics



Coronavirus outbreak




Coronavirus: at a glance






Infectious diseases




explainers






Share on Facebook






Share on Twitter






Share via Email






Share on LinkedIn






Share on Pinterest






Share on WhatsApp






Share on Messenger








Reuse this content




 