Coronavirus and Australian sport – a list of the major cancellations




Guardian sport


Thu 19 Mar 2020 05.01 GMT

First published on Mon 16 Mar 2020 06.41 GMT






Share on Facebook






Share on Twitter






Share via Email













Latest
AFL season to start as planned with Richmond v Carlton at the MCG
AFLW finals series brought forward; top four in each conference qualify
All cricket in Australia cancelled; NSW declared Sheffield Shield champions
Second round of NRL season given green light but without fans
W-League grand final and A-League to go ahead; grassroots cancelled
Australian rules football
The AFL season has been cut from 23 rounds to 17, with all 18 teams to play each other once, but it will start as scheduled on Thursday, when Richmond play Carlton behind closed doors at the MCG. Round one will go ahead as planned but without any fans and there will be empty stadiums “for the foreseeable future”. That decision was taken last week in the light of the Australian government’s advice against holding gatherings of more than 500 people. The AFL confirmed on Monday that if one player tests positive for Covid-19, the AFL will shut down for at least 14 days.
The final two rounds of the AFLW regular season have been cancelled and the finals series brought forward. The top four in each conference qualify with the three-week series beginning this weekend.
The VFL season, along with other state leagues including the SANFL, WAFL, NEAFL and TSL – and their associated women’s competitions – have been postponed until at least 31 May.
Rugby league
The NRL season started last week without restrictions on fans attending games, and will continue as planned in round two, although games will from this point on be played behind closed doors. The league CEO, Todd Greenberg, said on Monday that due to the quick-moving nature of the outbreak, it was keeping an open mind and would move in line with any future advice from the government and health authorities.
The Women’s Premiership does not start for six months, while the State of Origin series will be played in Adelaide, Sydney and Brisbane in June and July. No decision has been made on either of those series.
Football
Football Federation Australia has announced the remaining six weeks of the A-League season will go ahead, as will the weekend’s W-League grand final, but both will be played behind closed doors. There is also the likelihood the rest of the A-League season will be compressed into three or four weeks, with shorter turnarounds in between matches. A decision on the finals series is yet to be made.
The Matildas’ upcoming fixtures against the US – in Utah on 11 April – and Canada – in Vancouver on 14 April – have both been cancelled. The Socceroos’ World Cup qualifiers have also been affected – Fifa and the AFC have postponed Asian qualifiers in March and June – while this year’s Copa América, to which Australia were invited, has been postponed by the South American Football Federation.
All grassroots football, including training and matches, has been suspended until 14 April.
Netball
It is currently the netball off-season, but with Super Netball scheduled to start at the beginning of May, Netball Australia – which has established a Covid-19 working group – is monitoring the situation. The competition’s official pre-season tournament, the Team Girls Cup, has been cancelled.
Cricket
The remainder of the Australian cricket season – at all levels – has been cancelled and NSW declared Sheffield Shield champions with the final on 27 March called off.
The three-match ODI series between Australia’s men and New Zealand was called off after just one was able to be played, albeit without fans.
Australia’s women were due to play ODI and T20 series in South Africa, starting on 22 March, but that tour has been suspended until further notice. CA said it was monitoring the situation before making a decision on international matches beyond that.
Tennis
The French Open has been moved from May to September while both the ATP Tour and the WTA Tour have been shut down. The Fed Cup finals in Hungary next month, at which Australia were due to appear, have been postponed. The ITF said it remains committed to delivering the tournament and is working to find a suitable alternative date.
Rugby union
Super Rugby has been postponed indefinitely just seven rounds into 18, after the announcement that travellers returning to New Zealand would have to self-isolate for 14 days made the international competition unviable.
The Super W regular season finished at the weekend, but the last two weeks of the competition have been postponed.
There is no guarantee the Wallabies’ three home Tests in July – against Ireland and Fiji – will go ahead.
Basketball
The Perth Wildcats have been awarded the NBL title after games four and five of the finals series were called off. The Wildcats were leading 2-1 when the Sydney Kings decided not to travel Perth due to fears over the virus. 
Motor sport
After the Australian Grand Prix was dramatically postponed at the last minute on Friday, the FIA has confirmed that the Bahrain and Vietnam Grands Prix will now not take place on their scheduled dates. The Dutch Grand Prix on 3 May and the Spanish Grand Prix a week later are also in doubt. Meanwhile, Formula E has suspended its season until May, which means races in Paris, Seoul and Jakarta will be affected.
The Supercars championship has been postponed until June and rounds in Tasmania, Auckland and Perth put on hold.
Cycling
Australian World Tour team Mitchelton-Scott has pulled out of all men’s and women’s events until at least 22 March as a precautionary measure. Cycling Australia released a statement this week advising that all programs and events should proceed as scheduled, although it also issued several recommendations for people attending those events.
The Paris-Nice race that was due to finish on Sunday looked set to be cancelled after the French Cycling Federation (FFC) announced the cancellation of all cycling events on French soil. The Giro d’Italia, which was due to begin in Hungary in May, has also been postponed.
Swimming
April’s age swimming championships and national championships in Perth have been cancelled. Olympic and Paralympic trials are not scheduled to be contested until June.
A dedicated Covid-19 website has been created by the Australian Institute of Sport with up-to-date information on the virus and its relevance to sport.


Topics



Australia sport






Coronavirus outbreak




Australian rules football




AFL




AFLW




Rugby league




NRL




news






Share on Facebook






Share on Twitter






Share via Email






Share on LinkedIn






Share on Pinterest






Share on WhatsApp






Share on Messenger








Reuse this content




 