Australia's overcrowded prisons could struggle to control coronavirus, expert says

Australian prisons could struggle to control an outbreak of coronavirus in a system that is already overcrowded and under-resourced, a prison health expert has said.
And levels of overcrowding could increase with the national suspension of new jury trials, meaning that people on remand face a longer wait for their case to be resolved.
As of Thursday, there have been no reported cases of Covid-19 in an Australian prison, however a number of staff and inmates in Queensland were tested as a “precautionary measure”.
The South Australian government has conducted emergency scenario planning on how to manage a potential outbreak in its prisons. Queensland and Western Australia have announced special task forces to manage the threat.



PM tells Australians to 'stop hoarding' as he announces sweeping measures to slow spread of coronavirus







Read more





New South Wales temporarily suspended all prison visits until Sunday and is handing out 600 tablet computers, originally purchased for staff, to prisoners to allow them to do video calls in place of in-person visits.
The NSW corrective services commissioner, Peter Severin, said prison authorities were also building 20 temporary video conferencing studios to ensure court hearings and meetings with lawyers can be done remotely.
“Like the rest of the community, it’s important we minimise all potential cases of Covid-19 in our prisons,” Severin said. “Our focus remains on protecting staff and managing risks to ensure that we maintain safe and secure operations within all our work locations.”
All states have put policies in place to discourage people who are unwell, or returning from overseas, from visiting loved ones in prison. Western Australia said it was organising for video calls between visitors and prisoners.
It comes as the United Kingdom is facing calls to release some people charged with lower-level offences to prevent the spread of the virus, after the first case of Covid-19 in a UK prison was reported this week.
Turkey, Iran and some prisons in the United States have released prisoners in response to the outbreak.
Craig Cumming, from the University of Western Australia, said many prisoners had illnesses that placed them in a higher risk category for Covid-19, and that governments should show “a similar level of care” to protecting prisoners as they do to protecting aged care homes.
“Prisoners have a much older health age than their actual age,” Cumming said. “A lot of people in prison have had fairly difficult lives, and particularly if they are older, or if they are Indigenous, their health problems may be substantial.”
One third of all incarcerated people in Australia have a chronic disease such as diabetes, according to the Australian Institute for Health and Welfare.



Fears over coronavirus risk in prisons as first UK inmate case confirmed







Read more





About 22% have asthma. One in five prisoners over the age of 45 have at some point been diagnosed with cardiovascular disease. Three-quarters are smokers. Diabetes, asthma, and cardiovascular disease are all high-risk comorbidities for Covid-19.
As of December, there were about 43,000 people incarcerated in Australian prisons on any given day, one third of whom were on remand. The rate of imprisonment in Australia has doubled since 1990.
That has led to overcrowding, and Cumming said people were now sharing cells that were built for one.
Queensland’s prison system is at 139.7% capacity, with 4,400 prisoners – more than half of the current population – sharing cells. Western Australia’s prisons are at 91.5% capacity. South Australia has 260 spare beds. Victoria and NSW are both building new prisons to keep pace with rates of imprisonment.
Cumming said that any control measures – including potential lockdowns caused by staff shortages, as prison officers who are unwell stay home for 14 days – could have a significant impact on mental health.
If an outbreak did occur in a prison, Cumming said, prisoners may have to be moved to contain it.
“The prison is not set up for everyone to be in solitary confinement at one time,” he said. “They do not have space for that.”


Topics



Prisons






Coronavirus outbreak




Infectious diseases




New South Wales




South Australia




Western Australia




Queensland




news






Share on Facebook






Share on Twitter






Share via Email






Share on LinkedIn






Share on Pinterest






Share on WhatsApp






Share on Messenger








Reuse this content




 