Teachers, counselors, food delivery: coronavirus crisis fuels army of volunteers

With an N-95 mask on and fully sanitized hands, Denise Alexander walked up to a grey house in Kirkland, Washington, and dropped off four bags filled with everything from eggs and canned chicken to toilet paper and a bottle of all-purpose cleaner.
Inside was a mother and her seven-year-old daughter who had just been diagnosed with coronavirus. Alexander said they had already been struggling, ever since local schools were closed and the woman’s daughter could no longer access the free meals provided there. But after their diagnosis and spending time in hospital, they were both in home quarantine and in need of more urgent help.
Alexander, 36, from Seattle, left the supplies at the front door – enough to last them four days at least – and then, from her car, emailed the family to say it was safe for them to come out.
This is the system Alexander has rapidly developed and deployed over the last week, since launching the Facebook group “Quarantined, I need help!”. Aided by some 20 other volunteers and a wide array of donations from the community, Alexander said they had already made at least 50 deliveries to families who have reached out for help through a private email address.


 
 

 
 Facebook 
 
 Twitter 
 
 Pinterest 


 Denise Alexander, creator of the Facebook group ‘Quarantined, I need help!’, drops off groceries for a family with coronavirus on Monday in Seattle. Photograph: Jovelle Tamayo/The Guardian
The stay-at-home mom said she decided to start the group in an effort to help the many people in the state who were struggling following the outbreak of coronavirus. But, she said, given that there are many who can’t afford delivery services, it has also been to help encourage more people to stay inside.
“If my kids were starving to death right now and I was in quarantine, even if I went to jail for it, I cannot say that I would not get them food,” said Alexander.
“I know a lot of people feel that way, so I don’t want it to come to that,” she added.
Alexander and her team of volunteers are some of the many community members in Washington state, and across the US, who have responded to the coronavirus outbreak by seeking out the most vulnerable and offering assistance in whatever form they can.
There’s the barista in Seattle who started hosting free weekday breakfasts and a consultant and career coach offering pro-bono virtual strategy sessions to not-for-profit groups who have seen their fundraising events canceled. Justin Brotman, who founded the organic, cold-pressed juice company Healeo has started simply sending funds to laid-off restaurant workers in Seattle to cover utility and grocery bills.


 
 

 
 Facebook 
 
 Twitter 
 
 Pinterest 


 The International District in Seattle. Photograph: Jovelle Tamayo/The Guardian
Each of them has recognized that at a time of such upheaval, for some people in Washington, government agency and social aid organization assistance may not come nearly fast enough or address everyone’s needs. They’ve taken it upon themselves to offer what they can, and in that way, helped to shift the narrative surrounding this virus from fear and distress to one of strength and a community that comes together.
As of Tuesday, Washington health officials had confirmed 1,187 cases and 66 deaths.
In response to the growing number of cases, the governor of Washington, Jay Inslee, banned gatherings of more than 50 people, as well as sit-in service at all food establishments, including restaurants, bars and coffee shops. He also recently announced that all kindergarten through 12th grade public and private schools in Washington would be closed for at least six weeks.
Tricia Diamond, who lives in Seattle, wanted to help make sure these students don’t fall behind or lose their academic footing, and also continue to have some kind of educational stability in their lives. On Tuesday, the former aerospace engineer turned teacher started offering free online classes.
The courses, which are open to students from kindergarten through 12th grade based anywhere in the country, are presented through YouTube Live and Skype. They include everything from Dutch and world history to algebra and physics. The classes run all day, with 10-minute breaks in between, and families can pick and choose which ones their child will join.


 
 

 
 Facebook 
 
 Twitter 
 
 Pinterest 


 Tricia Diamond is offering help keep students on track while Seattle schools are closed due to coronavirus concerns. Photograph: Jovelle Tamayo/The Guardian
Diamond said she had had 28 students sign up, and other teachers have started reaching out to her about helping to provide additional classes.
“This is a scary time for the kids as well, so it’s good to provide them that consistency,” said Diamond, 53.
She said the courses were primarily for children of color because they may not have access to other types of opportunities during this long break from school.
“I’m initially gearing it towards students of color, particularly Native Americans, black, brown students, that really don’t have access to other programs, as well as realizing inequities [among] their families that may still be required to work,” said Diamond.
But as daily life across Washington and the US continues to shift dramatically and the community faces a future increasingly filled with unknowns, there is also a very important psychological component to this global pandemic.
Eileen Wurst, a licensed mental health counselor and teacher of reiki in West Seattle, said she had recently noticed an increased amount of anxiety in response to the virus outbreak, so she launched a free, two-day-a-week virtual support group. Started about two weeks ago, the sessions last an hour and are held over Zoom, a video conferencing service.


 
 

 
 Facebook 
 
 Twitter 
 
 Pinterest 


 Wurst hosts a session at her Seattle home. Photograph: Jovelle Tamayo/The Guardian
“It’s one thing to read the news and to even connect online through social media, but it’s another to have a space where you can connect online, but you’re in real-time and you’re sharing what it is you’re going through,” she told the Guardian.
During a session on Sunday evening, she asked each of the five participants, who could be seen through a small rectangle at the top of the screen, to tell the group about their experiences over the past week and how they were feeling.
One woman mentioned feeling like a wave, with a lot of highs and lows, while a man who works for Microsoft talked about a sense of underlying stress and his effort to live day-to-day.
Jodi Wheeler, 56, said she had been more hopeful lately as she had seen local leaders taking steps towards addressing this outbreak. But after her volunteer activities were put on hold and her spouse started working from home, she remarked on how different life was.
“I have pets; I have parents; I have all of these things to worry about while I sit in my house in Redmond and wait for something to happen,” she said. “I’m never very good at waiting.”
About halfway through the session, Wurst had everyone lie down or get a bit more comfortable in their chairs. She asked them each to place their hands over their hearts, as she led them through a meditation session.
“We’re just going to spend some time coming in to a breath, into our bodies, letting go, letting it flow,” she told each of them.


Topics



Coronavirus outbreak






Washington state




Seattle




features






Share on Facebook






Share on Twitter






Share via Email






Share on LinkedIn






Share on Pinterest






Share on WhatsApp






Share on Messenger








Reuse this content




 