Coronavirus: Foreign Office finalising plans to evacuate Britons

The government is finalising plans to evacuate UK nationals from the Chinese province at the centre of the coronavirus outbreak, Downing Street has said, with plans expected to be announced imminently.
“The Foreign Office is urgently exploring options for British nationals to leave Hubei province,” a Downing Street spokesman said. “Details are being finalised, and the FCO will confirm these as soon as they can.” 
A Foreign Office update advised Britons in Hubei to ring one of two dedicated 24-hour telephone numbers before 11am on Wednesday to register their desire to be evacuated.
On Tuesday evening the Foreign Office updated its advice to warn against all but essential travel to mainland China following the coronavirus outbreak.
The travel advice for China on the gov.uk website was updated to say: “If you’re in this area and able to leave, you should do so.
“The Chinese government continue to impose further restrictions on movement within China in response to the coronavirus outbreak. It may become harder over the coming weeks for those who wish to leave China to do so.”
Dominic Raab, the foreign secretary, said: “Due to the increasing travel restrictions and the public health situation, we now advise against all but essential travel to China.
“We are also working urgently to finalise arrangements for an assisted departure from Hubei province for British nationals this week, and are in contact with people in Hubei to ensure they register their interest and that we can keep them updated.
“The UK continues to be guided by the latest medical advice about the coronavirus outbreak. The safety and security of British people will always be our top priority.”
The transport secretary, Grant Shapps, said earlier on Tuesday that UK officials were attempting to identify how many want to leave from Hubei province, where the virus began, centred around the provincial capital of Wuhan.
Britons were being asked to contact the consulate if they want to be airlifted, Shapps said, as British citizens expressed frustration at what was said to be a lack of communication and contrasted the UK response unfavourably with the rapid reaction of other states to airlift their nationals.
Many British nationals on social media were also discussing rumours that an announcement about flights would be made within hours.
“We don’t have a list of people in the region so we keep on putting the message out,” Shapps told Sky News, which reported that Britain and China would work on a possible evacuation of UK citizens from Hubei in the next few days.
“Not everybody wants to be repatriated but we are working on arrangements with other international colleagues to do that.”
Quick guide What are coronavirus symptoms and should I go to a doctor?  
 Show 
 Hide  


What is Covid-19?

It is caused by a member of the coronavirus family that has never been encountered before. Like other coronaviruses, it has come from animals.



What are the symptoms this coronavirus causes?

The virus can cause pneumonia-like symptoms. Those who have fallen ill are reported to suffer coughs, fever and breathing difficulties.
In the UK, the National Heath Service has defined the symptoms as:
a high temperature - you feel hot to touch on your chest or back
a new continuous cough - this means you've started coughing repeatedly



Should I go to the doctor if I have a cough?

Medical advice varies around the world - with many countries imposing travel bans and lockdowns to try and prevent the spread of the virus. In many place people are being told to stay at home rather than visit a doctor of hospital in person. Check with your local authorities.
In the UK, NHS advice is that anyone with symptoms should stay at home for at least 7 days. If you live with other people, they should stay at home for at least 14 days, to avoid spreading the infection outside the home.



Is the virus being transmitted from one person to another?

Yes. China’s national health commission confirmed human-to-human transmission in January.



How many people have been affected?

China’s national health commission confirmed human-to-human transmission in January. As of 19 March, more than 219,000 people have been infected in more than 150 countries, according to the Johns Hopkins University Center for Systems Science and Engineering.
There have been over 8,900 deaths globally. Just over 3,200 of those deaths have occurred in mainland China. Many of those who have died had underlying health conditions, which the coronavirus complicated.
More than 84,000 people are recorded as having recovered from the coronavirus.




Was this helpful?







Thank you for your feedback.

In Wuhan, some UK citizens complained of what they described as a lack of clarity on the part of the British government, but there was also confusion about what Britain’s departure from the European Union would mean in terms of any partnerships with other EU states.
“People want to know if there is permission from the Chinese government for the flights to leave,” Kathleen Bell told the Guardian.
She had yet to contact a Foreign Office helpline number but added that Britons on social medial had been gathering lists of names themselves in recent days.
“One of the deciding factors for a lot of people though is whether they will be allowed to bring their Chinese spouses or children with them.”
The Twitter account of Britain’s embassy in Beijing, UK in China, has been posting the numbers for a 24-hour helpline that British citizens in Hubei can call.
Q&A How can I protect myself and others from the coronavirus outbreak?  
 Show 
 Hide  
The World Health Organization is recommending that people take simple precautions to reduce exposure to and transmission of the coronavirus, for which there is no specific cure or vaccine.
The UN agency advises people to:
Frequently wash their hands with an alcohol-based hand rub or warm water and soap
Cover their mouth and nose with a flexed elbow or tissue when sneezing or coughing
Avoid close contact with anyone who has a fever or cough
Seek early medical help if they have a fever, cough and difficulty breathing, and share their travel history with healthcare providers
Many countries are now enforcing or recommending curfews or lockdowns. 
In the UK, NHS advice is that anyone with symptoms should stay at home for at least 7 days.
If you live with other people, they should stay at home for at least 14 days, to avoid spreading the infection outside the home.



Was this helpful?







Thank you for your feedback.

As almost 1,300 new cases were confirmed on Monday in China and the death toll rose to more than 100, the latest official advice in the UK is for anyone travelling from the affected areas of China to isolate themselves regardless of whether they have symptoms. Those who feel unwell are to be quarantined.
Peter Openshaw, professor of medicine at Imperial College London and a former adviser to the government on the Sars pandemic, said “every possible precaution” needed to be taken and predicted that self-quarantine at home was likely to be part of the response in Britain.
“It’s undoubted that this is something that we need to be very concerned about. I don’t think we need to panic but we need to be very concerned,” he told the BBC’s Today programme.
Asked about whether the National Health Service had the necessary resources to deal with the crisis, Openshaw added: “I think there is going to have to be a lot of self-quarantine and this is part of the government policy, that people should quarantine themselves at home while results are awaited.
“There are many things that we don’t know at the moment and a particular concern at the moment is that transmission may be occurring among people who are not symptomatic. The science on that is not really very strong. We need to know a lot more about the asymptomatic disease.”


Topics



Coronavirus outbreak






China




Asia Pacific




news






Share on Facebook






Share on Twitter






Share via Email






Share on LinkedIn






Share on Pinterest






Share on WhatsApp






Share on Messenger








Reuse this content




 