Morning mail: Bloomberg quits, second Australian coronavirus death, AAP fallout

Good morning, this is Richard Parkin bringing you the main stories and must-reads on Thursday 5 March.
Top stories
Mike Bloomberg has quit the race to become the Democratic presidential candidate and Elizabeth Warren will “assess the path forward” after Joe Biden stormed to victory in nine states on Super Tuesday, overtaking Bernie Sanders with 553 pledged delegates compared with the Vermont senators’ tally of 488. The former New York city mayor had spend more than $500m during a bumbling campaign that garnered just 50 delegates and won only American Samoa, despite an unprecedented advertising blitz. A rejuvenated Biden, buoyed by commanding wins in North Carolina and Virginia, and surprise wins in Massachusetts and Minnesota, crowed to supporters in Los Angeles: “They don’t call it Super Tuesday for nothing.” Faced with an unprecedented turn of events, Rachel Bitecofer asks how did Biden claim a stunning Super Tuesday surge, while Sanders hit a wall? And Ankita Rao writes reports on how Warren destroyed Bloomberg’s campaign in 60 seconds.
A second death from the coronavirus has been confirmed inside Australia after a 95-year-old woman died at a Sydney hospital. At least 42 cases have been confirmed across the nation, including transmissions that have happened locally. Around the world Italy has announced the closure of schools and universities as its death toll has passed 100, while the UK’s chief medical officer has confirmed the probability of an epidemic there was “likely”. Meanwhile fears of a global economic slowdown have risen after a lukewarm response from markets to an attempt at stimulus by the US Federal Reserve.
A federal government-backed economic stimulus package is expected within days as Canberra looks to protect the Australian economy from the fallout from the coronavirus through a new business investment allowance, a financial boost for pensioners and immediate support for small and medium-sized businesses. Economists have warned that Australia could slide into recession despite economic growth during the December quarter.
Australia


 
 

 
 Facebook 
 
 Twitter 
 
 Pinterest 


 A firefighter defends a property near Potato Point on NSW south coast in January. Photograph: Mike Bowers/The Guardian
The conditions that fuelled Australia’s bushfire emergency could become eight times more likely if global heating reaches 2C, research suggests. A team of international scientists modelling increased greenhouse gases also found that the risk of Australia suffering severe bushfires has increased four-fold since 1900.
Australian Associated Press staff have been told that its major shareholders, Nine Entertainment and News Corp, no longer wanted to subsidise a breaking news service for their competitors. A critic of the decision to close AAP from June, Paul Hamra, said it “gives more strength to the bigger players, and fewer voices”.
Residents of Norfolk Island say it is running out of food after the decommissioning of a ship by the main freight company servicing the island. Supermarket shelves have been without staples including rice, flour and toothpaste.
The world


 
 

 
 Facebook 
 
 Twitter 
 
 Pinterest 


 Ayman Odeh, chairman of the Arab-Israeli Joint List, speaks at the alliance’s election campaign headquarters in Shefa-’Amr. Photograph: Chine Nouvelle/Sipa/Rex/Shutterstock
Arab politicians are likely to become the third biggest force in the Knesset as another inconclusive election result appears likely in Israel. Joint List alliance candidates have secured 15 of the 120 seats, while Benjamin Netanyahu’s Likud party appears two or three seats short of forming government.
Ukraine’s President Volodymyr Zelenskiy has ousted the nation’s prime minister after less than six months in office characterised by political infighting and falling approval ratings.
India has announced it will restrict the export of dozens of drugs including paracetamol and antibiotics, prompting concerns of global shortages of essential medicine. Seventy per cent of the ingredients used by India’s pharmaceutical firms come from Chinese factories, many of which have been shutdown due to the coronavirus.
Tropical forests are losing their ability to anchor carbon dioxide, raising concerns that inside the next decade the Amazon could become a net-producer of carbon instead of an absorber, owing to widespread logging.
Recommended reads


 
 

 
 Facebook 
 
 Twitter 
 
 Pinterest 


 ‘Loneliness is already a serious mental health problem in this country.’ Photograph: EyeEm/Alamy
“Self-isolation” during the coronavirus might not sound too bad to some as long as you’re healthy – a little holiday where you can decimate that bedside pile of books, plough through Netflix and have the perfect excuse for the millennial’s most beloved pastime – bailing on plans. But a period of convalescence gave Josephine Tovey a little insight into how lonely it can be and how much we will crave human connection while we’re isolated.
The Australian economy is ill-prepared for the impact of the coronavirus, writes Greg Jericho: “Government spending and exports are keeping the economy afloat. Now that is fine as far as it goes, but when you are facing a global crisis that is affecting trade, then it means you need to fall back on your private sector domestic economy. And right now the domestic private sector is in dire trouble.”
It’s the bestselling games machine of all time and, as the PlayStation 2 turns 20, Keith Stuart examines why it became so transformative. “It took developers time to understand the architecture of this forward-looking console … designed to generate large, explorable 3D environments and fill them with life.” But by including a DVD player as well as a console, the PS2 became the first to graduate “from teen bedroom to family living room”.
Sport


 
 

 
 Facebook 
 
 Twitter 
 
 Pinterest 


 The Ferrari flag on display at last year’s Italian Grand Prix. Photograph: Massimo Pinca/Reuters
Formula One is facing legal action from seven of the 10 teams after it reached a secret agreement with Ferrari that neither cleared nor condemned the manufacturer of illegality for the engine it raced with last season, writes Giles Richards.
The Brumbies coach, Dan McKellar, is considering an approach from Rugby Australia to become the Wallabies forwards coach but for the sake of his club and the Australian team he should stay right where he is, writes Bret Harris.
Media roundup
Major resources companies will hold crisis talks over the coronavirus’ risk to more than 60,000 fly-in, fly-out workers, reports the West Australian. The National Trust has raised major concerns about a proposed rezoning of a development area near Central station in Sydney, which could allow 200-metre-tall buildings to “overwhelm” historic landmarks, the Sydney Morning Herald writes. And local chocolate makers who re-bought the beloved Violet Crumble brand have had to introduce 24-hour shifts to keep up with demand, the Adelaide Advertiser says.
Coming up
Parliament resumes with the government seeking to pass legislation it says will give police faster access to data held by tech giants.
The Treasury secretary, Steven Kennedy, will give his department’s estimate of the coronavirus’ impact on the economy when he faces a Senate committee.
And if you’ve read this far …


 
 

 
 Facebook 
 
 Twitter 
 
 Pinterest 


 Donald Trump places his hands on a glowing orb in Riyadh. Photograph: Reuters Tv/Reuters
It was the mysterious glowing orb and a photo that launched a thousand internet memes but what ever happened to the globe at the middle of geopolitical mystery? According to a new book, the sphere is now in US possession – but locked away for fear of scandal, writes Martin Pengelly.
Sign up
If you would like to receive the Guardian Australia morning mail to your email inbox every weekday, sign up here.

Topics



Guardian Australia's morning mail








Share on Facebook






Share on Twitter






Share via Email






Share on LinkedIn






Share on Pinterest






Share on WhatsApp






Share on Messenger








Reuse this content




 