Police issue warning against coronavirus fraudsters in UK

Fraudsters have been quick to latch on to the coronavirus outbreak, with fake “Centers for Disease Control” emails and other scams already tricking the UK public out of £800,000, according to the police.
The National Fraud Intelligence Bureau (NFIB) on Friday issued an urgent scam warning after identifying 21 cases of fraud involving coronavirus in February.
Ten of the frauds involved desperate buyers of face masks, with one person paying £15,000 for masks that were never delivered.
Q&A How can I protect myself and others from the coronavirus outbreak?  
 Show 
 Hide  
The World Health Organization is recommending that people take simple precautions to reduce exposure to and transmission of the coronavirus, for which there is no specific cure or vaccine.
The UN agency advises people to:
Frequently wash their hands with an alcohol-based hand rub or warm water and soap
Cover their mouth and nose with a flexed elbow or tissue when sneezing or coughing
Avoid close contact with anyone who has a fever or cough
Seek early medical help if they have a fever, cough and difficulty breathing, and share their travel history with healthcare providers
Many countries are now enforcing or recommending curfews or lockdowns. 
In the UK, NHS advice is that anyone with symptoms should stay at home for at least 7 days.
If you live with other people, they should stay at home for at least 14 days, to avoid spreading the infection outside the home.



Was this helpful?







Thank you for your feedback.

Other frauds involve emails and texts purporting to be from research organisations affiliated with the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention and the World Health Organization.
The NFIB said: “They claim to be able to provide the recipient with a list of coronavirus infected people in their area. In order to access this information, the victim needs to click on a link, which leads to a malicious website, or is asked to make a payment in bitcoin.”
It added that it expected to receive many more reports of fraud as the coronavirus spread globally.

The advice to consumers is not to click on links or attachments in suspicious emails, and never respond to unsolicited messages and calls that ask for personal or financial details.
Individuals can report fraud or cybercrime to Action Fraud any time using its online reporting tool at actionfraud.police.uk.


Topics



Coronavirus outbreak






Cybercrime




Internet




Police






Share on Facebook






Share on Twitter






Share via Email






Share on LinkedIn






Share on Pinterest






Share on WhatsApp






Share on Messenger








Reuse this content




 