Coronavirus 2 March: at a glance

The key developments in the global Coronavirus outbreak today include:
The total number of cases so far
Covid-19 has now infected at least 90,294 people globally with 45,702 reported to have recovered from the virus. The number of coronavirus deaths reached 3,080 on Monday, while the death toll in Iran rose to 66 – the highest outside China. In Italy, 52 people have died, while three have died in France.
Coronavirus keeps spreading
The outbreak has reached more than 60 countries, with Portugal, Ireland, Indonesia, Saudi Arabia, Jordan, Russia, Andorra and Tunisia reporting their first confirmed coronavirus cases on Monday, as well as the Czech Republic, Scotland, and the Dominican Republic.
Global economic growth could half, OECD warns
An escalation in the coronavirus outbreak could cut global economic growth in half and plunge several countries into recession this year, the Organisation for Economic Cooperation and Development has warned.
EU raises risk rating
The level of risk of contracting coronavirus within Europe has been raised from moderate to high.
Outbreak worsens in US
The number of confirmed US cases rose to 91, while New York reported its first case. The state of Florida has declared a public health emergency. So far, two people in the country have died from the virus.
Three new cases in England
Three new coronavirus infections were detected in England, bringing the total number of confirmed cases in the UK to 39. The prime minister, Boris Johnson, chaired an emergency Cobra meeting to discuss the government’s response to the outbreak and a plan detailing the government’s approach will be published on Tuesday.
 Up to 80% of people in Scotland could contract virus, medical chiefs warn
The Scottish government has forecast that up to 250,000 people could be admitted to hospital if the coronavirus outbreak turns into a full-scale epidemic.
UK doctors say NHS is not ready
An overwhelming majority of doctors fear the NHS is not well prepared to deal with a major outbreak of coronavirus, a survey has found, despite assurances given by Boris Johnson.
British Airways and Ryanair to reduce number of flights
Both airlines said they had cancelled hundreds of flights as demand for travel drops amid fears about the spread of coronavirus. The entire airline industry is bracing for multibillion-dollar revenue losses.


Topics



Coronavirus outbreak




Coronavirus: at a glance






Infectious diseases




Microbiology




explainers






Share on Facebook






Share on Twitter






Share via Email






Share on LinkedIn






Share on Pinterest






Share on WhatsApp






Share on Messenger








Reuse this content




 