'We're scared': US service workers see livelihoods vanish amid coronavirus

March was supposed to be big for Alice Stanford.
As a banquet server at two ritzy Los Angeles hotels, she knows her business is “feast or famine”, depending on the time of year. In summers, when conventions and conferences dry up, Stanford and her colleagues don’t work very much at all. But they bring in huge hauls during awards and conference seasons, and it’s then that they budget and save.
March was scheduled as the highest-revenue month for this entire year, Stanford said. Then came Covid-19, and emergency declarations by both the state of California and Los Angeles county.
Suddenly, large-scale events became taboo, and Stanford’s calendar, once filled with bookings, emptied before her eyes.
“When your biggest month of the year gets cancelled, you know, it’s pretty devastating,” she said.
Service industry workers across the country who rely on tips, service fees and foot traffic to pay their bills are confronting a bleak reality. Their livelihoods are either in serious jeopardy or have completely vanished, at least for the time being.
As Americans practice social distancing to combat the spread of a global pandemic from the coronavirus, establishments that rely on a steady stream of clients are being forced to cut hours or close entirely either because of government regulations or lack of business.


 
 

 
 Facebook 
 
 Twitter 
 
 Pinterest 


 Myra Luna Antonio closes Cafe Du Monde in New Orleans. The restaurant discontinued its seating service to comply with coronavirus related restrictions. Photograph: Jonathan Bachman/Reuters
Those decisions are dealing a catastrophic blow to service workers, who can’t just work from home like others, and who can’t immediately find a new job in their industry when no one is hiring.
“That’s our business, to serve people. And these are our customers, and our customers are not able to come to us. We can’t go to them. So fiscally, it’s not gonna work,” said Simone Barron, a restaurant server in Seattle and the co-founder of Full Service Workers Alliance and Restaurant Workers of America.
Barron started feeling the economic strains of the virus weeks ago, when foot traffic plummeted at her workplace in Seattle. She took a quick vacation in early March, and she essentially hasn’t had a job since. First, she got an email from her employer saying the company was cutting shifts drastically because no one was going out to eat. Then came a second email announcing the restaurants had shuttered for at least eight weeks.



Trump says coronavirus upheaval could last beyond August







Read more





Barron has filed for unemployment, but her estimated benefit is half of what she usually makes and will be completely swallowed by her rent. Meanwhile, as she thinks about the long-term impacts of this pandemic, she expressed fear over whether many of the Seattle restaurants that are closing will ever reopen.
“It’s a real panic right now because we don’t know how we’re going to pay our rent, or pay our bills, or buy food,” said Barron. “It’s scaring the shit out of me.”
In Silicon Valley, where tech workers were quickly advised to work from home, salon owner Karie Bennett has 45 tipped stylists who depend on her. She’s doing everything possible to reassure her customers that she’s running “the cleanest salon in the country”. Weeks ago, she ordered antibacterial soaps and hand wipes, and she’s testing out a hospital-grade Hepa filtered recirculator to see if it’ll work in a salon despite so much hair.
“I think some people might think we’re going overboard, but I just don’t think you can go too far with it, with cleaning and being sanitary,” said Bennett.
But despite all her precautions, the phone isn’t ringing with many requests for new appointments.


 
 

 
 Facebook 
 
 Twitter 
 
 Pinterest 


 A closed sign is posted to the entrance of the Musée Mécanique penny arcade at Fisherman’s Wharf in San Francisco on Monday. Photograph: Eric Risberg/AP
Stefanie Fox Jackson said the conversations around coronavirus that she overheard at her salon and skin bar in Ohio were mostly comical until a few days ago, when the tide turned and people became afraid. Now, she’s decided to close her doors temporarily, starting Tuesday.
Jackson’s workers get 30% of their wages from tips, but beyond that, they’re part of a commission-based industry. Jackson has been calling salons in New York and Florida, trying to figure out how to provide some compensation for her team while still paying her most important bills.
“Salons just don’t have the margins to say, ‘great, I’m gonna support payroll for three weeks with no revenue,’” she said.
Work is always slow in the winter for Araceli Torres, a manicurist in the Bronx, but now it’s thinned out even more. The salon where she works closes early when there’s no business, and she’s not even getting to work 30 hours a week. Her income has been slashed, so she’s basically not getting tips any more, either.
Torres, a single mother of two, worried about paying for the basics – electricity, cable, rent. She’s not alone. Last week, Stanford helped her union, Unite Here Local 11, sign up 419 people for unemployment.
“It was emotional because we were scared,” Stanford said. “But we were just, you know, pulling together. So in another sense, it was kind of beautiful.”


Topics



Coronavirus outbreak






Infectious diseases




news






Share on Facebook






Share on Twitter






Share via Email






Share on LinkedIn






Share on Pinterest






Share on WhatsApp






Share on Messenger








Reuse this content




 