Austerity has crippled the UK’s response to the coronavirus crisis | Letters

The assumption about the discussion of Covid-19 is that, where feasible, people will work at home and be absent when they have symptoms of the virus, or even when they have a cold or mild flu. Yet the announcements by airlines (BA says its survival is at stake amid crisis for airlines ‘worse than 9/11’, 14 March) are the tip of iceberg in terms of increasing job insecurity, which will spread rapidly. This may herald another aspect of the story: presenteeism, or people attending work when ill.
My research on the effects of the 2008 financial crisis and austerity, based on the government’s workplace employment relations survey, showed that presenteeism increased as a consequence of job insecurity, as employees wished to appear committed to their jobs. And trust in management, not just in the government, is crucial. The research also showed that actions taken by management increased distrust in a way that also led to presenteeism. Employees were anxious about how, for example, managers would apply absenteeism rules or arbitrarily select people for redundancy.
It is vital then that managements give consistent and fair messages to employees. The danger in sending out messages about how the organisation is responding to the virus crisis prefaced with a policy of business as usual, or at least as near usual as possible, is that the messages amplify uncertainty.Prof Stephen WoodUniversity of Leicester
• Not wanting to add to the alarm caused by the valid criticisms of government policy on Covid-19 (Editorial, 16 March; When I heard about Johnson’s plan I thought it was satire, Journal, 16 March), I recognise the value of the additional funds being made available to the NHS and the range of activities under way in many sectors to try to contain the virus. But one missing piece of the jigsaw that urgently needs more attention and funds is local-level activity. Directors of public health are well placed to develop realistic plans that will work to meet local conditions and needs. Local government and public health budgets must be immediately increased to allow them to implement central directives and local initiatives.Prof Susanne MacGregorEast Finchley, London
• Polly Toynbee (Hospital chiefs will be forced to make some terrible choices, Journal, 17 March) rightly points out how rundown the NHS has become after a decade of austerity, with fewer beds, doctors, and nurses per head of population compared with other industrialised countries. But austerity has affected the UK in other ways that have reduced the country’s capacity to deal with Covid-19. Threadbare council services, which have borne the brunt of cuts, and the undermining of the police, fire and ambulance services, and indeed the British army, all underscore the UK’s unpreparedness.
At the same time, austerity has created a precariat class that is highly vulnerable to Covid-19, including 320,000 homeless people, 1.2 million food bank users and 1.3 million destitute people, according to the Joseph Rowntree Foundation. At the same time, part-time and zero-hours contract working has increased massively, undercutting the financial resilience of hundreds of thousands of people.
Back in 2010, if the UK had invested heavily in physical and social capital, the country would not only have been in a far better position to confront the virus, but the nation’s economy would also have grown faster, reducing public debt over a longer time frame, and Brexit would probably have been avoided.Kevin GulliverDirector, Human City Institute
• Sadly, we are now facing the consequences of having a government that for the last 12 years has stripped the NHS of both human and technical resources, and now that it is in charge of a pandemic is saying, “What can we do, since we don’t have enough test kits, ventilators, beds, doctors, nurses, public health specialists?” Let’s hope all the elderly who voted for this government survive the virus, but also realise their mistake and don’t do it again!Chris MillerPutney, London
• Join the debate – email guardian.letters@theguardian.com
• Read more Guardian letters – click here to visit gu.com/letters
• Do you have a photo you’d like to share with Guardian readers? Click here to upload it and we’ll publish the best submissions in the letters spread of our print edition 


Topics



Coronavirus outbreak






Infectious diseases




NHS




Airline industry




Health




Local government




Conservatives




letters






Share on Facebook






Share on Twitter






Share via Email






Share on LinkedIn






Share on Pinterest






Share on WhatsApp






Share on Messenger








Reuse this content




 