Anywhere but Westminster: we need your help covering the coronavirus

For 10 years, the Guardian’s Anywhere but Westminster video series has been about getting out into communities, giving voice to ordinary people, and trying to find a new way of covering politics and current affairs. As the series has evolved, we have also been increasingly focused not just on the problems people are experiencing, but the ways in which they are coming together to solve them.
In the midst of the coronavirus crisis, this work has suddenly become simultaneously more difficult and more important than ever. So we’re going to try to re-imagine how the series works, and we need your help.
We’re aiming at producing a weekly film, centred on how people and places are responding to the crisis, dealing with the issues we have always covered: questions about power, community, and how everyday life is actually lived.
This is how we want your help
We want to build a network of local contributors and grassroots organisations, and involve our audience in guiding us and sending us footage and information about what is happening all across the country. We do not want to put anyone at risk of either catching or spreading the virus, so at the moment we are asking for people to do things only within their daily routine, and asking that they follow government social distancing advice.
We’ve not lived through something like this before, so we don’t know exactly what this will look like. And we want you to help us shape it. If you have a story to tell, or want to highlight an interesting way in which your community is responding to the crisis, get in touch through this form.
How to take a video on your phone
If you want to send a video to tell us your story please:
Speak directly to the camera, and hold it horizontally;
Keep it personal, about you, and your community;
Where possible also take some video shots of what you are talking about.
How to get in touch with us
If you want to send a video now, you can email us at anywhere.but.westminster@the guardian.com but if you want to get in touch with us then please share your details in our encrypted form below. Only the Guardian will see your responses.

If you’re having trouble using the form, click here. Read terms of service here.


Topics



Coronavirus outbreak




Anywhere but Westminster






callout






Share on Facebook






Share on Twitter






Share via Email






Share on LinkedIn






Share on Pinterest






Share on WhatsApp






Share on Messenger








Reuse this content




 