Care homes and coronavirus: 'We think of residents’ emotional wellbeing'

Rosamund Davies, 91, would not be happy if the government banned her family from visiting her at the Birtley House nursing home, set in 48 acres of beautiful Surrey Hills countryside. “I would be very cross if visits from my children were restricted,” she said. “And I would be furious if I was told I had to stay in my room, self-isolating.
“I’m not worried in the least about this virus. When you get to my age, things have to be a lot worse than this to worry you – like an earthquake. At my age, the only people whose health I worry about are my children and grandchildren. If I catch this virus and shuffle off this mortal coil, then I’d be perfectly happy.”



Care homes ban family visits to stem spread of coronavirus







Read more





Davies doesn’t need to worry about her social life being curtailed quite yet. Simon Whalley, the chairman of the Birtley House group – and grandson of the firm’s founder, Dr Lloyd Driver – is determined to keep the home open to residents’ loved ones for as long as it remains safe to do so.
“We’ve restricted all non-essential visits,” he said. “But we’ve got to think of our residents’ mental and emotional health; stopping all visits before the government advice has said it’s necessary could have a detrimental effect on their wellbeing.”
Nevertheless, the home is ready if the advice changes. “We are in a very fluid situation and constantly update everyone,” said Whalley. At least three weeks’ worth of dried food has been stockpiled. Medical supplies are ordered a month in advance; local pharmacies have a duty of care to inform the home if it looks like they won’t be able to deliver new supplies on time, so that the local GP can be informed.
The home has also introduced its own safety measures. Staff restrict their movements to specific areas of the building. If a staff member contracts the virus, only the part of the home they work in will have to be deep-cleaned.
All deliveries are already being left outside the home. An external postbox has been set up so that even letters and cards are only bought into the home by staff.
If a resident at the home wants to self-isolate in their room or if they lack the mental capacity and their family ask for it, the home is already well practised in barrier nursing. One resident has already taken this option.
“We need to isolate or barrier-nurse to reduce the risk of spreading infections which can contaminate others, such MRSA, shingles, influenza, norovirus outbreak, as well as the coronavirus,” said Whalley.
Staff in these instances wear protective clothing including gloves, apron and mask. Visitors must check before entering the room, and residents in isolation are not allowed to wander around the care home.
Reluctant to bring in people from outside if their staff fall ill, the home has been preparing their employees to cover each other’s work where possible: everyone from the nutritionist to the maintenance staff and menu takers are ready to pick up any slack to keep the home running smoothly.
“Everyone is very concerned and very keen to do everything they can to help,” said Sylwia Indycka, the home’s registered manager. “We had a meeting yesterday and at least half of those there were staff who had came in on their day off to attend.”
As well as regular meetings between managers and staff, residents and their families are being kept in the loop. “What’s vital is that whatever we do is totally transparent,” said Indycka. “We need our residents to trust us and to stay calm and positive. That’s good for their mental health and their physical resilience.”
Helen Hughes, 92, said she felt very reassured by the measures the home had taken. “I’m quite calm,” she said, sitting with her alcohol hand gel on the table next to her and a sheet of paper, in large print, demonstrating precautionary hand washing. “My daughter and son-in-law were here this morning and they live in London. We’re all very aware of the virus. I know it’s extremely serious, but I’m not worried about it.”


Topics



Coronavirus outbreak






Social care




Care workers




features






Share on Facebook






Share on Twitter






Share via Email






Share on LinkedIn






Share on Pinterest






Share on WhatsApp






Share on Messenger








Reuse this content




 