Coronavirus cuts World senior team event while Carlsen extends run

The world senior team championships for over-50s and over-65s finished prematurely in Prague on Thursday after seven of the nine rounds when the Czech government announced that groups of more than 30 people were banned. The United States team, which led the over-50s, agreed their four games with Iceland drawn after a few moves to ensure gold. England’s grandmasters were out of the team medals, but the captain, Glenn Flear, won the individual third board gold with an unbeaten 5.5/7.
Two days earlier during the fifth round, the ban was only for groups of 100, which the chess organisers, on advice from the Deputy Health Minister, Professor Roman Prymula, escaped for the 400-strong championships by installing extra partitions.



Chess: Fide drops handshakes after coronavirus cancels five Opens







Read more





A highlight of the actual play was Scotland’s 3-1 victory against the higher rated Germans, a score which included a crushing 23-move attack.
There has been controversy aplenty even before a pawn is pushed at the eight-man world title Candidates due to start in Ekaterinburg, Russia, on Tuesday. Teimour Radjabov withdrew when Fide refused his request that the event should be postponed because of coronavirus. Some were sceptical, because Radjabov finished a poor last in the 2013 Candidates and had more than once since sounded doubtful about another attempt.
China’s Ding Liren has had a fortnight’s quarantine near Moscow before the start, but during that period the virus danger has implicated all the other non-Russians: Anish Giri from the Netherlands, Maxime Vachier-Lagrave from France, and Wang Hao who went to Tokyo to escape Beijing, are all journeying from affected countries. On Wednesday, Fabiano Caruana, the No 1 seed and favourite, tweeted that his planned flight from New York to Moscow had been cancelled and that he was urgently seeking a replacement. Fide has since confirmed that Caruana arrived in Ekaterinburg on Friday morning.
The Candidates is a marathon 14-round, three-week event lasting until 4 April, so there may be some more anxious moments along the way. However, Fide is taking plenty of health and safety precautions, as listed in a press release issued on Thursday:
• A checkpoint with a qualified nurse will be created for all participants of the tournament, and officials and visitors in the auditorium. At this point, visitors will be checked for symptoms of Covid-19 before entering the game room, including checking their body temperatures.
• Alcohol-based hand sanitizers will be available at all times.
• N95 face-masks will always be available in the required quantity. Depending on the assessment of the situation, the wearing of masks may become mandatory for visitors in the auditorium.
• Handshakes before and after the game are optional.
• Spectators who come to the venue will not have access to the playing area.
• Preventive measures (masks, disinfectants) must also be provided in all hotel rooms where participants and officials will be staying, as well as in all vehicles used for the tournament.
Games will be free and live to watch online, with move by move grandmaster and computer commentaries, starting at 11am on Tuesday.



Iranian chess referee who fled to UK could face arrest if she returns







Read more





Magnus Carlsen is officially resting from major tournaments for a few months as he waits to see who will emerge from Ekaterinburg as his challenger. The world champion played his third Norwegian League game against an amateur last Sunday, smoothly defeating 2135-rated Manuel Ramírez. Carlsen’s victory took the champion’s current world record unbeaten run to 121 games.
England’s David Howell also plays in the Norwegian League, where he won a 20-move brevity by trapping two pieces in mid-board in original fashion.
Chess activity is likely to diminish sharply in the weeks and months ahead as coronavirus continues to spread. Compensation for both professionals and amateurs is that playing online and watching master games like the Candidates online remains unaffected.
You can arrange an online game for yourself in a few seconds. Lichess is an excellent free site where you can choose your time limit for the game and find an opponent very quickly.
3662 1 Bxh7+! Kxh7 2 Qh5+ Kg8 3 Bxg7! Kxg7 4 Qg4+ Kh7 5 Rf3 1-0. Famous precedents for this classic two-bishop sacrifice are Emanuel Lasker v Johann Bauer, Amsterdam 1889 and Aron Nimzowitsch v Siegbert Tarrasch, St Petersburg 1914.


Topics



Chess




Leonard Barden on chess






Coronavirus outbreak




Czech Republic




news






Share on Facebook






Share on Twitter






Share via Email






Share on LinkedIn






Share on Pinterest






Share on WhatsApp






Share on Messenger








Reuse this content




 