Travel bans plunge China into deepening isolation over coronavirus

The growing coronavirus epidemic is isolating China, as other countries, trying to ward off infection or contain their own smaller outbreaks, bar entry to travellers from China, and companies including Apple scale down travel and business there.
The UK announced on Saturday it had withdrawn all but essential staff from embassies and consulates in China, as authorities at home dealt with fallout from the first two cases confirmed in Britain – a student at the University of York and a visiting relative.
The university’s vice-chancellor, Charlie Jeffery, said that although he understood the diagnoses would “cause concern and anxiety”, it would not disrupt studies. “We’re working closely with the lead agency, Public Health England, and other agencies to manage this situation,” he said.
The two patients are now under quarantine in Newcastle, and the York hotel room they had been staying in has been disinfected. The university said the student is not believed to have come into contact with anyone on campus while they had symptoms. 
Authorities are trying to trace people who had “close contact” with the pair – which is defined as spending at least 15 minutes within two metres of the infected person.
In total, 203 people have been tested for the disease in Britain, and only two results have been positive. The vast majority of infections and all deaths are still inside China, and concentrated in Hubei province. By Saturday, 13,968 cases and 304 deaths had been confirmed, 45 of them overnight in Hubei province. But the rapid spread of the virus beyond Chinese borders has raised fears that other countries could face large-scale outbreaks, and many governments are taking increasingly strong measures to prevent an epidemic on their territory.
On Saturday, Australia followed the US by imposing a ban on entry to most travellers from China. Canberra said citizens, residents or relatives would still be allowed in. Countries including Uzbekistan and Vietnam cancelled flights from China altogether.
Dozens of commercial carriers have cut back or halted flights to China, and several hotel chains have said they will allow cancellations by Chinese travellers. Major companies such as Google and Facebook have banned travel to the country, while international retailers such as Starbucks and Apple have shut stores.


 
 

 
 Facebook 
 
 Twitter 
 
 Pinterest 


 The convoy transporting British nationals who had arrived from Wuhan to the Wirral on Friday Photograph: Cpl Tim Laurence HANDOUT/EPA
In Hong Kong, where there are strong memories of the impact of the 2003 Sars outbreak, thousands of hospital staff went on strike, demanding that authorities close the border.
Britain has not yet brought in similar bans, but precautions are being increased. Eighty-three British nationals flown out of Wuhan on Friday spent their second night of two weeks in quarantine at Arrowe Park hospital in Wirral yesterday.
The University of Derby also asked a “very small number” of students who left Wuhan before restrictions were imposed to self-isolate for 14 days. All are currently well.
A UK-wide public health campaign is to be launched on Sunday urging people to use tissues and wash their hands regularly to help stop the spread of the virus. The message will be in adverts in newspapers and on radio and online forums known to be used by Chinese nationals living here.
Cases of human-to-human transmission, which has driven the fast rise in infections inside China, have been detected in Germany, Thailand, Taiwan, France, Japan and the US.
“The real issue now for the world is what happens outside China,” Sir Jeremy Farrar, director of the Wellcome Trust, told the BBC. “What we need to look out for now is when does [it] start to spread – if it spreads – in the community or between people outside China itself. And that will be the signal that actually other countries may suffer from the same sorts of issues we see in China.”
He said the severity of any wider outbreak could lie anywhere between something like seasonal winter flu and “something akin to what we are seeing in China at the moment”.
“The uncertainty at the moment means we cannot be sure which pathway this epidemic is going to take,” Farrar added.
Quick guide What are coronavirus symptoms and should I go to a doctor?  
 Show 
 Hide  


What is Covid-19?

It is caused by a member of the coronavirus family that has never been encountered before. Like other coronaviruses, it has come from animals.



What are the symptoms this coronavirus causes?

The virus can cause pneumonia-like symptoms. Those who have fallen ill are reported to suffer coughs, fever and breathing difficulties.
In the UK, the National Heath Service has defined the symptoms as:
a high temperature - you feel hot to touch on your chest or back
a new continuous cough - this means you've started coughing repeatedly



Should I go to the doctor if I have a cough?

Medical advice varies around the world - with many countries imposing travel bans and lockdowns to try and prevent the spread of the virus. In many place people are being told to stay at home rather than visit a doctor of hospital in person. Check with your local authorities.
In the UK, NHS advice is that anyone with symptoms should stay at home for at least 7 days. If you live with other people, they should stay at home for at least 14 days, to avoid spreading the infection outside the home.



Is the virus being transmitted from one person to another?

Yes. China’s national health commission confirmed human-to-human transmission in January.



How many people have been affected?

China’s national health commission confirmed human-to-human transmission in January. As of 19 March, more than 219,000 people have been infected in more than 150 countries, according to the Johns Hopkins University Center for Systems Science and Engineering.
There have been over 8,900 deaths globally. Just over 3,200 of those deaths have occurred in mainland China. Many of those who have died had underlying health conditions, which the coronavirus complicated.
More than 84,000 people are recorded as having recovered from the coronavirus.




Was this helpful?







Thank you for your feedback.

Modelling published in the Lancet suggested more than 75,000 people could have been infected in Wuhan a week ago, about 50 times higher than the official worldwide total of cases at the time. If the transmissibility of the disease was “similar everywhere”, the paper said, epidemics could already be “growing exponentially in multiple major cities of China with a lag time behind the Wuhan outbreak of about one to two weeks”.Inside China, quarantine rules that have put around 50 million people on lockdown are being tightened in some places.
Huanggang, the second-worst-affected city, with over 700 infections and 14 deaths, has effectively confined almost everyone to their homes. One person from each family will be allowed out to get food every two days, although there are exceptions for medical workers, sick people seeking treatment, and those staffing supermarkets and hospitals.
Elsewhere, local governments have pushed back the end of the lunar new year break; schools and universities will not resume classes this week as planned, and in some places factories have been told to delay restarting work.
People have been urged to delay weddings, particularly the large numbers planned for today, 2 February – a popular date because, written as a sequence of numbers, it is a palindrome: “02 02 2020”.
Even funerals are under pressure, with families asked to keep mourning “simple and expeditious” to avoid gatherings. Bodies of coronavirus victims are to be cremated as soon as possible.


Topics



Coronavirus outbreak




The Observer






Infectious diseases




China




Asia Pacific




news






Share on Facebook






Share on Twitter






Share via Email






Share on LinkedIn






Share on Pinterest






Share on WhatsApp






Share on Messenger








Reuse this content




 