Care homes ban family visits to stem spread of coronavirus

Care homes across the country are banning visits from friends and family and keeping residents indoors in an effort to stem the spread of coronavirus.
The government has not told care providers to shut their doors to all non-essential visits but the former health secretary Jeremy Hunt, chair of the Commons health and social care committee, told BBC Newsnight on Thursday he was “personally surprised that we’re still allowing external visits to care homes”.
Mario Kreft, the chair of Care Forum Wales, which represents more than 450 care and nursing homes, advised people on Thursday morning to stay away. “Simply put, not visiting care homes is likely to save people’s lives,” Kreft said.
He called for bureaucracy to be cut so older people who no longer needed hospital care could be transferred to care homes, freeing up hospital beds.
“We’ve got to do everything that we can to ensure that people are safe, and I would say this to anybody who wants to visit a loved one in a care home to think very, very carefully because totally accidentally, this virus could be transmitted,” he said.
Q&A How can I protect myself and others from the coronavirus outbreak?  
 Show 
 Hide  
The World Health Organization is recommending that people take simple precautions to reduce exposure to and transmission of the coronavirus, for which there is no specific cure or vaccine.
The UN agency advises people to:
Frequently wash their hands with an alcohol-based hand rub or warm water and soap
Cover their mouth and nose with a flexed elbow or tissue when sneezing or coughing
Avoid close contact with anyone who has a fever or cough
Seek early medical help if they have a fever, cough and difficulty breathing, and share their travel history with healthcare providers
Many countries are now enforcing or recommending curfews or lockdowns. 
In the UK, NHS advice is that anyone with symptoms should stay at home for at least 7 days.
If you live with other people, they should stay at home for at least 14 days, to avoid spreading the infection outside the home.



Was this helpful?







Thank you for your feedback.

Research from China has shown that over-60s make up more than 80% of coronavirus deaths. A study in the Journal of the American Medical Association calculates that the mortality rate for those aged 80 or older is 14.8%. For those aged 70-79, it is 8%, and for 60- to 69-year-olds it is 3.6%.
Opinion is divided on how best to protect older people, however. The government’s chief medical adviser has said pensioners currently do not need to self-isolate.
But Dr Bharat Pankhania, who has devised national and international communicable disease control action plans, said the government was not doing enough to protect over-60s.
He called for tighter restrictions, such as advising them against going to crowded public places, as had happened in the US.
“I am not saying they should self-isolate but I am saying they should think about how many people they’re around in public, because the mortality risk of that age group is unbelievable,” he told Sky News.

Three care homes in Swindon, two in Northampton, two in Fife and all 25 homes run by the Balhousie care group in the north-east of Scotland have banned visitors. Several care homes in Jersey are asking people to stay away.
One of Tayside’s largest care homes is among a number of providers to have banned non-essential visitors.
The bans followed after a positive test for coronavirus at Oakridge House care home in Basingstoke, Hampshire. It is not yet known if the person is a resident or staff member but the facility is now closed to all visitors.
Downs View care home, Ashbury Lodge and Church View nursing home in Swindon, managed by Coate Water Care, shut their doors to visitors on Wednesday.
“We are currently identifying a number of situations where we may make exceptions,” said Coate Water Care’s operations director, Sue Houldey.
“These scenarios may include somebody being imminently end of life, or a major family incident. We are keeping this decision under review every two days.”
The homes are still open for admissions and will receive GP visits and other medical support.
 B&M Care, which has 26 care homes across the country, has announced it is “cocooning” – placing residents in preventive isolation – in all its homes for two weeks.
The Balhousie care group, which has 900 residents and more than 1,200 staff, has given residents iPads to maintain contact with friends and family. Only doctor and district nurse visits, and visits making essential deliveries and repairs will be allowed.



Care homes and coronavirus: 'We think of residents’ emotional wellbeing'







Read more





A spokeswoman said there were no cases of coronavirus among its residents and staff and the move was a preventive measure.
Rosturk House care home in Cupar and Peacehaven in Lundin Links – both in Fife – are allowing visits to residents only in exceptional circumstances. Abbeyfield and Palm Springs in Jersey are not allowing visitors in or residents out.
Dr David Halpern, the chief executive of the government-owned Behavioural Insights Team and a member of Whitehall’s Scientific Advisory Group for Emergencies, told the BBC the government was considering a policy of cocooning those most vulnerable to coronavirus.“There’s going to be a point, assuming the epidemic flows and grows as it will do, where you want to cocoon to protect those at-risk groups so they don’t catch the disease,” he said.
“By the time they come out of their cocooning, herd immunity has been achieved in the rest of the population.”


Topics



Coronavirus outbreak






Older people




Social care




Infectious diseases




Wales




Scotland




news






Share on Facebook






Share on Twitter






Share via Email






Share on LinkedIn






Share on Pinterest






Share on WhatsApp






Share on Messenger








Reuse this content




 