Coronavirus quarantine and self-isolation: your questions answered

Health authorities are advising that people returning from areas affected by the new coronavirus should self-isolate.
What is the difference between self-isolation and being put in quarantine?
Self-isolation is a sort of voluntary quarantine, where people have to make their own arrangements.
What are people who are self-isolating expected to do?
They are expected to stay at home, and certainly not go to work or college. It has been described by public health officials as taking the same measures you would if you had a heavy cold – although perhaps the better comparison would be the flu.
The key thing is not to go near other people, to avoid spreading the virus, which is transmitted via droplets from coughs and sneezes. It is thought you need to be relatively close to inhale those droplets – maybe within a metre or so. But the droplets can also land on surfaces and transfer to people’s hands – hence the advice to wash them frequently.

Can they go to the shops to get food?
At first, some officials suggested it would do no harm to go to the shops, assuming people keep their distance from others. But more recently they have been advising people to arrange food deliveries to their homes.
What about their family?



Coronavirus map: how Covid-19 is spreading across the world







Read more





The virus is most likely to be transmitted at close quarters, to family members. Those people will be at risk in any circumstances if one of the family is infected.
If people are returning to family from an affected area, the others may want to keep their distance as much as they can – or self-isolate as well.
Quick guide What are coronavirus symptoms and should I go to a doctor?  
 Show 
 Hide  


What is Covid-19?

It is caused by a member of the coronavirus family that has never been encountered before. Like other coronaviruses, it has come from animals.



What are the symptoms this coronavirus causes?

The virus can cause pneumonia-like symptoms. Those who have fallen ill are reported to suffer coughs, fever and breathing difficulties.
In the UK, the National Heath Service has defined the symptoms as:
a high temperature - you feel hot to touch on your chest or back
a new continuous cough - this means you've started coughing repeatedly



Should I go to the doctor if I have a cough?

Medical advice varies around the world - with many countries imposing travel bans and lockdowns to try and prevent the spread of the virus. In many place people are being told to stay at home rather than visit a doctor of hospital in person. Check with your local authorities.
In the UK, NHS advice is that anyone with symptoms should stay at home for at least 7 days. If you live with other people, they should stay at home for at least 14 days, to avoid spreading the infection outside the home.



Is the virus being transmitted from one person to another?

Yes. China’s national health commission confirmed human-to-human transmission in January.



How many people have been affected?

China’s national health commission confirmed human-to-human transmission in January. As of 19 March, more than 219,000 people have been infected in more than 150 countries, according to the Johns Hopkins University Center for Systems Science and Engineering.
There have been over 8,900 deaths globally. Just over 3,200 of those deaths have occurred in mainland China. Many of those who have died had underlying health conditions, which the coronavirus complicated.
More than 84,000 people are recorded as having recovered from the coronavirus.




Was this helpful?







Thank you for your feedback.

What should they do if they feel unwell?
They should not go to a doctor’s surgery or medical facility, where they risk infecting other people, some of whom may be very vulnerable because they have health problems. They should stay home and call for advice. In the UK they should use the NHS 111 number.
What measures would be taken if someone does not follow the advice?
These are voluntary measures and they cannot be compelled. Authorities have imposed stricter quarantine conditions on people known to have been exposed to high-risk situations.


Topics



Coronavirus outbreak






Infectious diseases




explainers






Share on Facebook






Share on Twitter






Share via Email






Share on LinkedIn






Share on Pinterest






Share on WhatsApp






Share on Messenger








Reuse this content




 