Cheltenham tries to calm fears of a Festival coronavirus postponement

Fear and scepticism were among the reactions offered by trainers on Wednesday when asked about the threat posed to the Cheltenham Festival by the coronavirus outbreak. Organisers insist the four-day meeting, which is the highlight of the jump-racing year, is on track to go ahead as planned on 10 March but privately there is sure to be fretting about what would happen if the number of cases in Britain were to increase.
“Gordon Bennett, it terrifies me,” said Nigel Twiston-Davies, expressing concern about the Festival being abandoned rather than about development of the virus itself. The situation reminds the Gold Cup-winning trainer of the 2001 foot and mouth outbreak, when the presence of sheep grazing on racecourse grounds resulted in that year’s Festival being lost.



Talking Horses: Epatante still the pick of Henderson's Hurdle contenders







Read more





“The over-reaction when there was a few sheep there …” Twiston-Davies said. “If somebody in Cheltenham happens to get it [coronavirus], what happens? Hopefully we’re close enough to the Festival that it’ll be OK but the Grand National meeting might be a different thing.”
Twiston-Davies was speaking at a media event at the racecourse to promote the Festival. His fellow Cotswolds trainer Fergal O’Brien, formerly an assistant to Twiston-Davies, took a diametrically opposed view. “I wouldn’t be worried at all, I think it’s a storm in a tea cup. I hope I’m proved right. I think it’s one of those things that’ll blow over and we’ll all get on with it as we should do. It [the outbreak] doesn’t affect the vast majority of the population.”
A market opened this week by Betfair suggests gamblers are closer to the Twiston-Davies way of thinking than O’Brien’s. While the Festival is odds-on to go ahead, punters assessed the chance of no racing at Cheltenham on 10 March as just a 5-2 shot, odds that shortened from 3-1 during the course of Wednesday. It means punters think racing is more likely to be abandoned than the favourite, Epatante, is to win the Champion Hurdle.
A calm approach was urged by the very experienced Ian Renton, who manages the racecourse for its owner, the Jockey Club. “At the moment the racing industry is working closely with the government and they have been extremely effective in keeping controls on the virus not entering this country, so we are delighted with what they have done and we look forward to the Festival happening in a fortnight’s time,” he said.
“We have seen various things that have come on the horizon at each Festival. Last year we had the equine flu, previously we had the ‘Beast from the East’, so there’s normally something around the corner to create a little bit of concern. At the moment, there is nothing to push us off course.”
Asked what contingency plans are in place should the Festival have to be postponed, Renton declined to offer specifics. “There are always thoughts for whatever eventuality there may be. Last year, we were working through, if we were to lose a day due to the winds, when we would stage it. So we have a number of scenarios in mind for whatever could happen.”
The main difficulty in staging the Festival at a later date is there are other races staged for more or less the same horses at Aintree’s Grand National meeting three weeks later and at Punchestown at the end of April.
The racing industry has set up a steering group, including representatives from the British Horseracing Authority, racecourses and horsemen, to deal with the problems raised by the coronavirus and the group met on Wednesday. Its conclusion was that action is not necessary yet and there is no need to develop a policy regarding abandonment of any specific fixtures because of coronavirus at this time.
A BHA spokesman said the steering group “will continue to liaise with government and monitor the implications of coronavirus. Further information or guidance will be issued to the industry as and when appropriate.”
Quick guide Thursday tips  
 Show 
 Hide  

Musselburgh1.00 Judex Lefou 1.30 Made For You 2.07 Shanroe Street 2.42 Overcourt 3.17 Celtic Flames 3.52 Away At DawnLudlow1.40 Feel The Pinch (nb) 2.15 Red Risk (nap) 2.50 Nautical Star 3.25 Another Venture 4.00 Whatsdastory 4.30 Optimised 5.00 DemopolisTaunton1.47 Todd 2.22 Eritage 2.57 On The Road 3.32 Jobsonfire 4.07 Risk And Roll 4.37 Lady Chartreuse 5.07 Time To TinkerNewcastle1.55 Sweet Dime 2.30 Papa Power 3.05 Persian Sun 3.40 Cosmelli 4.15 Dandys Gold 4.45 FortamourChelmsford5.30 Ice Ice Lady 6.00 Flying Focus 6.30 Maori Knight 7.00 Fantastic Flyer 7.30 Griggy 8.00 Lady Of York




Was this helpful?







Thank you for your feedback.



Topics



Horse racing






Cheltenham Festival 2020




Cheltenham Festival




British Horseracing Authority




Coronavirus outbreak




news






Share on Facebook






Share on Twitter






Share via Email






Share on LinkedIn






Share on Pinterest






Share on WhatsApp






Share on Messenger








Reuse this content




 