Coronavirus in the US: should we expect closures and shutdowns?

The time it took the coronavirus to go from the edges of US concerns to people in stores emptying shelves of hand sanitizer was roughly a week.



Trump makes breezy, boastful assessment of coronavirus impact in US – live







Read more





In response to outbreaks, Italy has shut down its schools and quarantined 16 million people. China has blocked off whole cities. In the US, cruise ships have been blocked from docking, hard-hit King county in Washington state has advised workers to stay home and older and sick people to stay indoors. Elsewhere, many events have been cancelled and a handful of schools shut.
With more than 500 cases in the US and the numbers rising, the question is: what measures will the US government take and will the country see widespread shutdowns?
“You should absolutely have the expectation that at some point coming up, this will be necessary,” Dr William Hanage, an epidemiologist at the Harvard School of Public Health, told the Guardian. “And have a plan for how you are going to do it, how you are going to look after the most vulnerable in the community, and how you are going to do it without turning your entire city and community upside down and inside out.”
As of Monday morning, at least 500 people have tested positive for coronavirus in the US and 21 had died. So far, 80% of patients experience a mild form of the illness, which can include a fever and pneumonia, and many of these cases require little to no medical intervention. But that has raised concerns it could spread to vulnerable groups because infected people assume they just have a bad cold.
“This is an intensely serious situation. However, there’s a lot you can do to reduce the risk to yourself and others,” Hanage said. “Your risk of getting it, per day, is actually quite low. So people should not panic but they should prepare.”
The top advice to prevent the spread of coronavirus is regular hand washing, changing to fresh clothes at home, coughing and sneezing into the crook of the arm, not shaking hands and avoiding touching the face.
Are schools going to close?
Steps have been taken in places such as Washington state and New York City. Some schools there have closed down after parents or students tested positive for coronavirus.
Globally, however, nearly 300 million children are out of school because of the coronavirus, according to Unesco. Italy, where at least 366 people have died, has ordered the closure of all schools and universities in the country until 15 March.
There are many unknowns about the role of children. At first, they appeared to not get the virus. Further investigation showed that it was because they have mild symptoms when infected and early research focused on the most dangerous cases. Now, the question is how much of a role children are playing in spreading the disease, if any.
“If you don’t close schools, you might run the risk having viral fountains in the middle of your community,” Hanage said.
Bioethicist Kelly Hills said school closures could lead some parents to form unofficial daycares with a few parents as supervisors of a group of kids while the others work. This could create a similar disease fountain as in school, just possibly without the education.
The 29.7 million US children who rely on free or low-cost lunch at school could also suffer.


 
 

 
 Facebook 
 
 Twitter 
 
 Pinterest 


 Some New York pharmacies have run out of face masks – but the CDC recommends people do not wear masks. Photograph: Justin Lane/EPA
“Too many people in America live paycheck to paycheck for this [school closures] to really be something that is an easy answer,” said Hills.
She does expect more school closures in the near future and anticipated sports competitions, professional or amateur, to be cancelled or played in empty stadiums.
In China, government officials went as far as to lock down the city of Wuhan, where the virus was first detected in December, in a practice known as cordon sanitaire. This concept dates back to the medieval ages, and while there is evidence it slowed the spread of coronavirus, public health experts said it was best for the US to avoid it.
When more extreme measures are taken, particularly if they are poorly communicated, it can breed fear, stigmatization and violence. It can also create distrust in the government, media and healthcare institutions.
Angela Rasmussen, a virologist at Columbia University, tweeted: “Rather than playing cordon sanitaire whack-a-mole with communities across the country, I’d like to see these resources go toward engaging the public on how to stop virus spread. Incentivizing employers to allow telecommuting. Providing safety nets to vulnerable people.”
If shutting down cities is not the answer, what is?
China was also successful at making testing widely available and free, something the US has failed to do.
The US Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC) initially prevented labs from developing their own tests, then sent out faulty kits and had strict guidelines for who should be tested. Once these issues were addressed, more than a hundred cases were identified in a few days.



This is an intensely serious situation. However, there’s a lot you can do to reduce the risk to yourself and others
William Hanage

Even more coronavirus cases could be identified if local and federal government manage to address the expense of coronavirus testing in the US. California and Washington on Thursday ordered insurers to pay for the kits and some are starting to do it voluntarily, though hidden costs are a hallmark of the US healthcare system and it’s not guaranteed treatment would be covered.
In China, if someone was being treated for coronavirus and their insurance couldn’t cover everything, the government would cover the rest, according to the World Health Organization (WHO). The country was also able to move 50% of its medical care online, the WHO said.
Mike Pence, who is overseeing the US response to coronavirus, said last week the country could test one million people by the end of the week. Within 24 hours, the vice-president admitted it was not actually possible.
Hanage said without rigorous testing, it is difficult for local governments to determine how far they should go in closing schools and public gatherings. “The difficult situation remains that the lack of testing means we are still fumbling in the dark,” he said.
How to protect the most vulnerable
One certainty with coronavirus is that the elderly and people with underlying conditions such as diabetes or heart and lung issues are the most vulnerable. The death rate for people 80 or over in China, in the government’s study of more than 72,000 cases, was 14.8%.
And because so many cases are mild, and people are capable of spreading it very early in infection, the most vulnerable and their loved ones are searching for answers about what extra precautions they should take.



Southwest Airlines chief compares drop in travel over coronavirus to 9/11







Read more





Tom Frieden, the director of the CDC under Barack Obama, told reporters this week he had advised his 90-year-old mother to cut down on her active social schedule, which includes three book clubs, because of the specific risks facing her age group.
But Dr Jennifer Nuzzo, an epidemiologist and senior scholar at the Johns Hopkins Center for Health Security, said it is difficult to offer concrete advice on how long these populations should avoid crowds and public gatherings because of how much is still unknown about coronavirus.
Pandemic or not, it is always wise for people to stay home if they have a fever, for the safety of themselves and others.
“I really think the key here is isolation,” Nuzzo said. “And making it so people do possibly over-isolate themselves. They’re not quite sure if they are coming down, but you know they might be sick so they are just going to stay home until they see how their symptoms pan out – certainly if they develop a fever, absolutely stay home.”
And if you aren’t yet at the stage, and are wondering if you’ll soon be working from home or dealing with a local school closure, do not underestimate the power of washing your hands.


Topics



Coronavirus outbreak






news






Share on Facebook






Share on Twitter






Share via Email






Share on LinkedIn






Share on Pinterest






Share on WhatsApp






Share on Messenger








Reuse this content




 