Britons in Wuhan decry ‘pathetic’ UK government coronavirus advice

British citizens trapped in Wuhan, the Chinese city at the centre of the coronavirus outbreak, say the UK government’s response has been slow and unclear, and its travel advice pathetic.
Up to 300 British citizens are thought to be stuck in Hubei province, where Wuhan is located and where most of the 80 deaths associated with the disease have occurred.
It is not clear whether the British government will conduct an evacuation, though the US and Japan are preparing airlifts, the US on Tuesday. The French carmaker PSA Group has also said it will evacuate its employees.
Kharn Lambert, 31, from Lancaster, who works as a PE teacher in Wuhan, described the city as a ghost town. All planes and trains have been cancelled and most private vehicles banned from the roads, as officials try to stop the spread of the virus.
His biggest concern, he said, was the wellbeing of his 81-year-old grandmother, who has chronic obstructive pulmonary disease and risks running out of medication in around one week’s time.
interactive map
Consulate staff in Wuhan initially put him in touch with a doctor to provide more supplies, but he is anxious it may not arrive in time. “I think it will take a lot longer than a week to be honest, unless they can send through diplomatic channels. It’s medication after all I’m sure it will to go through some sort of checks,” he said.
Lambert said he was going outside as little as possible to avoid increasing the risk of infecting his grandmother.
The British home secretary, Priti Patel, said on Sunday the government was “looking at all the options”, which could include airlifting UK citizens out of the worst-affected area. On Monday, theForeign Office issued updated guidance asking British nationals in Hubei province to get in touch.
Those who have fallen ill are reported to initially suffer coughs, fever and breathing difficulties. So far, 2,700 people have been affected across China and elsewhere, though the mayor of Wuhan has predicted a further 1,000 new cases. Most of the people who have died from the disease are older or have underlying health conditions. Medical facilities in the city have been completely overwhelmed by the outbreak and are short of beds and supplies.
Q&A How can I protect myself and others from the coronavirus outbreak?  
 Show 
 Hide  
The World Health Organization is recommending that people take simple precautions to reduce exposure to and transmission of the coronavirus, for which there is no specific cure or vaccine.
The UN agency advises people to:
Frequently wash their hands with an alcohol-based hand rub or warm water and soap
Cover their mouth and nose with a flexed elbow or tissue when sneezing or coughing
Avoid close contact with anyone who has a fever or cough
Seek early medical help if they have a fever, cough and difficulty breathing, and share their travel history with healthcare providers
Many countries are now enforcing or recommending curfews or lockdowns. 
In the UK, NHS advice is that anyone with symptoms should stay at home for at least 7 days.
If you live with other people, they should stay at home for at least 14 days, to avoid spreading the infection outside the home.



Was this helpful?







Thank you for your feedback.

Bethan Webber, whose mother, Dr Yvonne Griffiths, is also stuck in Wuhan, called on the UK government to act. Dr Griffiths, 71, from Thornhill in Cardiff, had been visiting Wuhan in her capacity as a visiting lecturer for Birmingham City University, and was due to fly back on Monday.
“She’s increasingly stressed by the situation, we all are. She’s not sleeping well. The more time goes on the more uncertain it feels and the more the risks seem to be increasing as the rate of infection grow,” Webber said.
Advice provided by the FCO – which states “if you are in this area and able to leave, you should do so” – was “pathetic”, said Lambert, given the entire city is locked down.
Nick, a teacher in Wuhan who asked to be referred to by only his first name, said his wife was Indonesian, and that the family had been offered far more support by the Indonesian embassy. “At least they [the Indonesian embassy] have been proactive. They phoned us. They have gone out of their way to look after us, whereas the British government hasn’t really done that,” he added.
Nick, who has two children, who are aged nine and 12, has dual British and US citizenship, and so has also contacted the US embassy for support. The US is arranging a flight for citizens, but he said he was awaiting an update.
Quick guide What are coronavirus symptoms and should I go to a doctor?  
 Show 
 Hide  


What is Covid-19?

It is caused by a member of the coronavirus family that has never been encountered before. Like other coronaviruses, it has come from animals.



What are the symptoms this coronavirus causes?

The virus can cause pneumonia-like symptoms. Those who have fallen ill are reported to suffer coughs, fever and breathing difficulties.
In the UK, the National Heath Service has defined the symptoms as:
a high temperature - you feel hot to touch on your chest or back
a new continuous cough - this means you've started coughing repeatedly



Should I go to the doctor if I have a cough?

Medical advice varies around the world - with many countries imposing travel bans and lockdowns to try and prevent the spread of the virus. In many place people are being told to stay at home rather than visit a doctor of hospital in person. Check with your local authorities.
In the UK, NHS advice is that anyone with symptoms should stay at home for at least 7 days. If you live with other people, they should stay at home for at least 14 days, to avoid spreading the infection outside the home.



Is the virus being transmitted from one person to another?

Yes. China’s national health commission confirmed human-to-human transmission in January.



How many people have been affected?

China’s national health commission confirmed human-to-human transmission in January. As of 19 March, more than 219,000 people have been infected in more than 150 countries, according to the Johns Hopkins University Center for Systems Science and Engineering.
There have been over 8,900 deaths globally. Just over 3,200 of those deaths have occurred in mainland China. Many of those who have died had underlying health conditions, which the coronavirus complicated.
More than 84,000 people are recorded as having recovered from the coronavirus.




Was this helpful?







Thank you for your feedback.

Everyone is holed up indoors, with many watching social media and chat groups for updates, added Matthew Heard, 31, from London, who works as an education consultant in Wuhan.
“There’s hundreds and hundreds of posts every few minutes, describing the situation in a slightly different way,” he said, adding that there was an atmosphere of confusion.
The FCO had given tentative comments about how it was “thinking about potential action”, he said, when people needed a concrete plan.
In a statement, the FCO said it was “working to make an option available for British nationals to leave Hubei province due to the heavy travel restrictions and increased difficulty of accessing consular or medical assistance.
“The safety and security of British nationals is our number one priority. We continue to monitor developments and are in close touch with the Chinese authorities.”
British nationals in Hubei Province who require assistance are advised to contact the FCO’s 24/7 number +86 (0) 10 8529 6600 or (+44) (0)207 008 1500, the statement added.



Topics



Coronavirus outbreak






China




Asia Pacific




news






Share on Facebook






Share on Twitter






Share via Email






Share on LinkedIn






Share on Pinterest






Share on WhatsApp






Share on Messenger








Reuse this content




 