Coronavirus latest: 12 March at a glance

Donald Trump bans Europeans from travelling to the US
The US president has suspended all travel to the US from Europe as he tries to limit the spread of the coronavirus. Passengers from the UK, Ireland and countries outside the EU’s Schengen travel zone would be exempt from the travel ban as Trump appeared to blame European travellers for “seeding” virus hotspots in the US. In a primetime address from the Oval Office, Trump also unveiled a series of measures worth around $250bn to cushion the economic impact of the virus, including a tax payment holiday and billions of dollars pumped into the financial system to ease liquidity. The sense of unease about Trump’s language prompted one former Obama speechwriter to say “he’s gonna get us all killed”.
Asia Pacific markets hammered again, with Europe and US to follow
Despite what Trump called the biggest package ever assembled to tackle a “foreign” virus, investors were not convinced that it was enough to prevent the world economy from careering into a recession. Asian stocks and Wall Street futures plunged deep into the red as the president spoke. The FTSE100 is expected to drop nearly 6% on Thursday morning despite the UK chancellor’s £30bn budget giveaway aimed at staving off the impact of the virus. The Dow Jones is seen shedding 3.5%. Mohamed El-Erian, the respected chief economic adviser to Allianz, said a global recession was “highly probable”. The Australian government unveilied an $11bn stimulus package but the local stock market still dropped 7%.
Tom Hanks and his wife test positive
The outbreak claimed its most high-profile victim so far when Tom Hanks announced he and his wife, Rita Wilson, had tested positive. The couple, who are in Australia where Hanks is making a film about Elvis, said they had felt “a bit tired, like we had colds” before being “found to be positive”. They have been sightseeing in Australia in recent days, posing for selfies with fans in Sydney.
NBA season suspended until further notice
America’s NBA basketball league has been suspended until further notice after a player for Utah Jazz tested positive. The move has shocked the sporting world as the NBA, home to some of America’s best-known athletes, approaches the crucial playoff season. The news broke in dramatic fashion when the Utah Jazz were about to start a game against the Oklahoma City Thunder when officials gathered in a huddle and the players were told to return to the locker rooms. In Australia, more Formula One team members tested positive ahead of the season-opening grand prix in Melbourne.
Global cases pass 126,000, deaths more than 4,600
The number of new infections continued to climb around the world. The Johns Hopkins University tracker says 126,258 people have contracted the disease and 4,638 have died. The vast majority of the victims have been in China but the country said on Thursday that it had only 15 new cases. Hubei, the province at the centre of the outbreak, recorded eight new cases, its first official single-digit tally.
Japan warned to prepare for cancellation of Olympics
Japan must prepare itself for the possibility that the Olympic Games, scheduled to start in Tokyo on 24 July, might have to be cancelled, according to a senior MP. Shigeru Ishiba, a former defence minister who has been tipped as the country’s next leader, said that while cancellation was still “unlikely”, the government must be ready for every possibility. Organisers say cancellation would be “unthinkable”.
New York and Chicago cancel St Patrick’s day parades
One of the biggest events in New York City’s calendar has fallen victim to the virus after the mayor scrapped this year’s St Patrick’s day parade set for 17 March. The colourful pageant celebrating the city’s Irish community brings huge crowds onto the streets as well as drawing visitors from all over the world. Chicago has also cancelled its parade.


Topics



Coronavirus outbreak




Coronavirus: at a glance






Donald Trump




Stock markets




Global economy




news






Share on Facebook






Share on Twitter






Share via Email






Share on LinkedIn






Share on Pinterest






Share on WhatsApp






Share on Messenger








Reuse this content




 