Coronavirus: first UK death confirmed as cases surge to 116

A woman in her 70s was confirmed as the first coronavirus death in the UK on Thursday as Downing Street warned that it was now highly likely that the virus would spread in “a significant way”.
It was thought she contracted the virus in the UK and had not been in contact with any other known cases. The woman, who was admitted to the Royal Berkshire hospital in Reading on Wednesday, had been “in and out of hospital” with underlying health conditions, the hospital said. The unnamed victim was tested on Wednesday but results only came back after she died early on Thursday morning. Boris Johnson said that “our sympathies are very much with the victim and their family”.
Graphic showing UK cases
With the number of cases in Britain more than doubling from 51 two days earlier to 116, the government escalated its response to the threat from Italy by saying that travellers returning from any part of the country – rather than just the north – should self-isolate if they begin to feel unwell.
And it enacted a major change in policy – announcing that some of those confirmed to have contracted the virus are now being treated at home rather than in hospital.
“We’ve moved to a situation where people have minimal symptoms and they can self-isolate. It’s safer for them to self-isolate in their own homes, with support,” said Prof Chris Whitty, the government’s chief medical adviser for the UK. “Anybody who needs hospitalisation will be hospitalised.”
The first fatality was among eight of the latest infections where health officials have not identified how they contracted the virus. These “unknowns” are causing particular concern because they became infected while in the UK and had no obvious links to other cases. Whitty signalled that the sharp uptick in these cases had forced a new approach, saying that it was now necessary to move from the “contain” to the “delay” stage of the response plan.
That would allow for school closures, steps to encourage home-working, and the reduction of large-scale gatherings. Whitty suggested that school closures would have only a marginal effect but that in general the change would “push the disease further from the winter pressure period, further out from the period when people have upper respiratory tract infections, and it buys us time to better understand the virus and start the research into vaccines.”
Boris Johnson’s spokesman echoed Whitty’s concerns over slowing the virus, warning that it was now likely to spread significantly. The prime minister was updated on the coronavirus by the chief medical officer and the chief scientific adviser as he opened an official Cobra meeting, he said.

“We will continue to try to contain this virus. However it’s now highly likely that the virus is going to spread in a significant way,” the spokesman said. “Officials will therefore accelerate work on preparations for the delay phase of the government’s plan focusing on steps we can take to seek to delay the spread of the virus.”
In other key developments:
• Deaths in Italy rose to 148 with the virus infecting 3,296 people – a rise of 590 in 24 hours – in all 20 regions as schools and universities closed nationwide.
• Greece closed schools, universities, theatres, museums and cinemas in three western regions after 21 new cases were detected among travellers who had recently returned from Israel and Egypt.
• Of the 116 confirmed cases across the UK since the outbreak began in late January, 18 have recovered, 52 are still being cared for in hospital and 45 are being treated at home.
• HSBC evacuated a floor of its Canary Wharf office tower in London, sending more than 100 staff home, after one tested positive for Covid-19.
• Starbucks said it was “pausing the use of personal cups” for those drinking their beverage in the UK, US and Canadian stores to reduce the risk of spreading the disease.
• The UK’s competition watchdog threatened to prosecute retailers and traders who take advantage of public concern about the coronavirus outbreak by hiking prices or making fake claims.
• The Bank of England governor Mark Carney pledged central banks and governments around the world would deliver a “powerful and timely” response, as stock markets fell again. The UK’s FTSE 100 closed down 1.6% while the Dow Jones in New York fell 3.6%.
• A leading football club executive admitted that the spread of coronavirus means it is likely Premier League matches will be played behind closed doors this month.
The government provided a regional breakdown of where all the cases are located, after reversing a controversial decision to withhold information about the geographical spread of the disease. That step came after Wednesday’s decision prompted accusations of secrecy and concerns that it would lead to the spread of fake news.
Whitty announced the reinstatement of daily location updates and admitted a “communication fumble” on the issue.
The newly-published details of the geographic spread of cases showed 25 were in London. Two more cases were confirmed in Liverpool. The first West Midlands case was also confirmed by health officials. New figures showed an increase of 30 cases from Wednesday, 25 of whom were in England. A total of 18,083 people in the UK have now been tested.
As the move to home treatment took place, Prof Steve Powis, NHS England’s national medical director, said: “If the symptoms are mild then it’s appropriate for people to be in a home setting rather than a hospital setting.”
Asked how the authorities are ensuring that infected patients are staying indoors, Dr Susan Hopkins, deputy director of Public Health England’s national infection service said that all were displaying very responsible behaviour.
“Many are isolating in their bedroom and only coming out of their room to get food and go back in,” she said. “They are being very responsible. These people are making very active decision to isolate themselves.”
Three new cases were confirmed in Scotland. The country’s chief medical officer, Dr Catherine Calderwood, said the new Scottish patients are from the Forth valley, Greater Glasgow & Clyde, and Grampian areas. All of them tested positive for Covid-19 after coming into contact with others who already had the virus.




Play Video





4:31





 How to stop the spread of coronavirus – video explainer


Topics



Coronavirus outbreak






Infectious diseases




news






Share on Facebook






Share on Twitter






Share via Email






Share on LinkedIn






Share on Pinterest






Share on WhatsApp






Share on Messenger








Reuse this content




 