Shutting schools would reduce coronavirus transmission – expert

A leading scientist behind the modelling of the spread of the coronavirus has said that shutting schools would reduce the transmission of the disease, as pressure grows on the UK government to introduce closures.
Prof Neil Ferguson, of Imperial College London and director of the MRC Centre for Global Infectious Disease Analysis, said that while it was not fully understood whether children transmitted the virus in the same way as other illnesses, school closures was a measure that could have an effect.
Speaking to the BBC Radio 4 Today programme on Tuesday, Ferguson said: “From a purely epidemiological perspective we think, with a lot of uncertainty, that closing schools and universities would further reduce transmission.

“I have to say we don’t fully understand whether children are transmitting this virus in the same way they would transmit other viruses but assuming that, it would have an impact.”
There have been calls for school closures throughout the coronavirus outbreak, with the Scottish first minister, Nicola Sturgeon, saying they would be kept under daily review.
Italy, France and Germany have all shut their schools.
Ferguson said: “It would also have other negative impacts, particularly on potentially health system capacity – a lot of nurses, a lot of doctors have school-age children.
Quick guide What to do if you have coronavirus symptoms in the UK  
 Show 
 Hide  

Symptoms are defined as either:
a high temperature - you feel hot to touch on your chest or back
a new continuous cough - this means you've started coughing repeatedly
NHS advice is that anyone with symptoms should stay at home for at least 7 days.
If you live with other people, they should stay at home for at least 14 days, to avoid spreading the infection outside the home.
After 14 days, anyone you live with who does not have symptoms can return to their normal routine. But, if anyone in your home gets symptoms, they should stay at home for 7 days from the day their symptoms start. Even if it means they're at home for longer than 14 days.
Information: If you live with someone who is 70 or over, has a long-term condition, is pregnant or has a weakened immune system, try to find somewhere else for them to stay for 14 days.
If you have to stay at home together, try to keep away from each other as much as possible.
After 7 days, if you no longer have a high temperature you can return to your normal routine.
If you still have a high temperature, stay at home until your temperature returns to normal.
If you still have a cough after 7 days, but your temperature is normal, you do not need to continue staying at home. A cough can last for several weeks after the infection has gone.
Source: NHS England on 18 March 2020




Was this helpful?







Thank you for your feedback.

“What is currently happening is there is a very thorough review of what a likely impact of school closure would be – both positive, in terms of reducing the epidemic, but also negative.
“As the prime minister made clear yesterday, school closure hasn’t been ruled out and may be necessary in coming weeks.”
The research released by Imperial College’s Covid-19 response team on Monday was behind the government’s strategy change for more stringent measures, including social distancing, to try to suppress the illness. Without further restrictions the death toll could be 250,000, it said.
Ferguson said the UK was three weeks behind Italy and two weeks behind France and Spain in terms of the virus’s spread.

The deputy chief medical officer for England, Jonathan Van-Tam, also kept the option of school closures on the table.
He said: “It is possible that we may have to look at other measures such as school closures but for the time being we are keeping this under review and as Prof Ferguson has said this is the subject of intense scrutiny within the scientific government community at the moment.”Asked about school closures having the potential to further reduce transmission, he said: “Potentially so.”
“We need to bear in mind school closures would have some negative consequences too in terms of the workforce, in terms of where children might congregate out of school and whether they might be looked after by grandparents who we are asking to social distance – the over-70s.

“This is a carefully balanced decision that can’t be taken quickly or lightly and needs to be given very serious scientific scrutiny and thought over the coming days,” he said.


Topics



Schools






Coronavirus outbreak




Medical research




Infectious diseases




news






Share on Facebook






Share on Twitter






Share via Email






Share on LinkedIn






Share on Pinterest






Share on WhatsApp






Share on Messenger








Reuse this content




 