Trump sparks anger by calling coronavirus the 'Chinese virus'

Donald Trump has referred to the coronavirus as “the Chinese virus”, escalating a deepening US-China diplomatic spat over the outbreak.
After giving an address on Monday warning of a possible recession, the US president posted on Twitter: “The United States will be powerfully supporting those industries, like Airlines and others, that are particularly affected by the Chinese Virus. We will be stronger than ever before!”
China’s foreign ministry spokesman Geng Shuang said Trump should take care of his own matters first. “Some US politicians have tried to stigmatise China … which China strongly condemns,” he said at a press briefing on Tuesday. “We urge the US to stop this despicable practice. We are very angry and strongly oppose it [the tweet].”
The World Health Organization has advised against terms that link the virus to China or the city of Wuhan, where it was first detected, in order to avoid discrimination or stigmatisation.



Ohio primary vote halted at last minute amid coronavirus court battle







Read more





The comment comes as Beijing and Washington appeared to be locked in a game of shifting blame. Last week, outspoken official Zhao Lijian from China’s ministry of foreign affairs accused the US military of bringing the virus to Wuhan. The US summoned Chinese ambassador Cui Tiankai over the comment and issued a “stern” warning to Cui.
On Monday, the US secretary of state, Mike Pompeo, issued “strong US objections” in a phone call with top Chinese diplomat Yang Jiechi. According to Chinese state broadcaster CCTV, Yang also issued “strong objections” to attempts by the US to “slander and smear” China’s efforts in combatting the virus.
Yang said such efforts would “not succeed” and that any harm to Chinese interests would invite retaliation. An editorial by the state news agency Xinhua on Tuesday said: “Using racist and xenophobic names to cast blame for the outbreak on other countries can only reveal politicians’ irresponsibility and incompetence.” 
As the global infections have surpassed those within China, Chinese diplomats and officials have begun pushing the idea that the virus did not originate within China.
Observers say both sides appear to be deflecting domestic criticism. Trump’s administration has been accused of moving too slowly to respond to the virus while Chinese authorities have been accused of covering up initial warnings about the outbreak and suppressing information throughout the crisis.
“This is his pathetic attempt at distracting people from his competence but it won’t work,” one internet user wrote on Weibo, among hundreds of angry and mocking comments over Trump’s remark. “Just when you think he could not go any lower,” another wrote on the discussion forum, Douban. “I am both laughing and speechless,” another said on Weibo.
The state-run tabloid Global Times posted on Twitter, which is blocked in China, that Trump was trying to “pass the buck”.

Global Times 
(@globaltimesnews)
What a president! By labeling the COVID-19 “Chinese virus,” Trump tries to hide his administration's lack of prevention & control measures against the #coronavirus. He passes the buck to China, trying to prove that he is NOT responsible for the current situation the US is facing. https://t.co/LubdzY1G1y

March 17, 2020

While the number of cases increases around the world, new infections in China have dramatically decreased. On Tuesday, there was only one domestic case of the virus recorded in China, and 20 “imported” cases.
Chinese state media has praised Beijing’s efforts in containing the virus. On Tuesday, an editorial in the state-run China Daily said that the world should learn from China’s example in aggressively quarantining and detecting the virus. At the height of the outbreak in China, local governments were criticised for excessive measures and lack of supplies and capacity.
The Chinese leader, Xi Jinping, said last week that China’s efforts had bought the world “precious time” to respond to the outbreak.
On Tuesday, China’s state planner said the economy would return to normal in the second quarter.



Covid-19: why are there different fatality rates?







Read more





More than 182,000 people have been infected with the virus, which has claimed the lives of more than 7,000 people, of which more than 3,000 deaths were in mainland China.
In the US, fallout from the spread of the outbreak hit the campaign trail, with voting in the Democratic primary in Ohio called off. San Francisco and five other Bay Area counties ordered all residents to stay at home in a drastic move similar to ones taken in Italy, Spain, France and China, but the first of its kind in the US. Trump also recommended Americans avoid gathering in groups of more than 10.
In other developments around the world:
The EU will close all external borders for 30 days from Tuesday morning, but EU citizens will be allowed to return.
Hong Kong announced it would require all arriving foreign travellers to go into two-week isolation.
In France, President Emmanuel Macron put the country into almost total lockdown. In a 20-minute live broadcast, the president repeated several times: “We are at war” and said: “All infractions will be punished”.
New Zealand announced an enormous spending package to fight the economic effects of Covid-19.
Britons were told to curtail social interactions. The new government advice, something of a U-turn, came during the prime minister’s first daily press conference.
Hundreds of prisoners escaped from prisons in São Paulo state in the south-east of Brazil on Monday, the day before their day-release privileges were due to be suspended over the coronavirus outbreak.
The Taj Mahal in India closed to tourists.


Topics



Coronavirus outbreak






China




Asia Pacific




Infectious diseases






Share on Facebook






Share on Twitter






Share via Email






Share on LinkedIn






Share on Pinterest






Share on WhatsApp






Share on Messenger








Reuse this content




 