Coronavirus latest: 18 March at a glance

Key developments in the global coronavirus outbreak today include:
Global death toll surpasses 8,000
The number of cases across the world reached 207,518, while it has been confirmed that at least 8,248 people have died as a result of the pandemic. According to figures compiled by Johns Hopkins University, 82,104 people known to have contracted the virus have recovered.
UK orders school closures as more deaths announced
The education secretary, Gavin Williamson, told the Commons that schools would not reopen after Friday for most pupils, but said the most vulnerable children and those of key workers, such as NHS staff, would still be able to go in.
The news came after it emerged the death toll in the country had surged to 104 as it was confirmed 32 more people had died in England. NHS England said the patients were aged between 59 and 94 and all had underlying health conditions.
More countries introduce isolation measures
Belgium became the latest to go into lockdown, with citizens asked to stay at home and limit contact to their closest relatives. Greece  announced its own measures, as did Portugal and Chile. Steps were also taken to limit travel in North America and in West Africa.
Trump announces proposal to take over private sector
The US president said he would invoke a federal provision allowing the government to marshal the private sector in response to the pandemic, the Associated Press reported. Trump said he would sign an act giving himself the authority to direct domestic industrial production “in case we need it”.
New York cases increase sharply
The number of cases in New York City have increased by 695 to 1,339 in 24 hours, according to the state governor, Andrew Cuomo. Across New York state, there had been 2,382 cases, he said. But he cautioned that the number of tests being administered had increased.
Ryanair to ground most flights
The Irish airline said “most if not all” flights would be cancelled after next Tuesday. It currently expects to run a “very small number of flights for essential connectivity”, mainly between the UK and Ireland. More than 80% of flights still scheduled until then will be grounded immediately.
Iran reports biggest jump in deaths from coronavirus
Iran reported its single biggest daily rise in deaths from the coronavirus on Wednesday, saying that a further 147 people had died in a nearly 15% increase that raises the death toll to 1,135 people. So far 17,361 people have been infected nationwide.
Italian death toll in largest one-day increase
A further 475 people died – the most in a single day since the outbreak began, according to the latest figures from the civil protection agency. In total, the death toll from the virus in the country, the worst affected in Europe, has now reached 2,978 – an increase of 19%, Reuters reported. A single area – Lombardy – saw 319 deaths, two sources with access to the data told the Reuters news agency.
First death in sub-Saharan Africa
Burkina Faso announced its first death, which is also the first known fatality in sub-Saharan Africa. The country has confirmed 27 cases and it is suspected that at least 200 more people have the disease.
In South Asia, Bangladesh also reported its first death. Officials in the country said 14 people have been infected.
Refugee resettlement paused
Two UN agencies announced that refugees would no longer be resettled to homes in safe countries. The UN refugee agency and the UN migration agency said resettlement would be suspended as “a temporary measure that will be in place only for as long as it remains essential”.


Topics



Coronavirus outbreak




Coronavirus: at a glance






news






Share on Facebook






Share on Twitter






Share via Email






Share on LinkedIn






Share on Pinterest






Share on WhatsApp






Share on Messenger








Reuse this content




 