Australia must dramatically expand its coronavirus testing regime, leading virologist says

Australia needs to dramatically and rapidly broaden its Covid-19 testing regimen to determine the full extent of the disease’s spread through the community, a prominent Australian virologist has said.
“If we don’t test, we don’t find,” virologist Dr Ian Mackay told the Guardian. 
But as the number of cases across the country reached 415, with five deaths, and the World Health Organisation urging all countries to “test, test, test”, Australia is facing a looming shortage of testing kits, with critical reagents – used to isolate the virus in the laboratory – running short around the world.
The federal health minister, Greg Hunt, indicated the government was working to rectify the testing shortfall.
“We have a team which is working with pathology providers,” he said on Tuesday afternoon. “It’s about ensuring we have not just additional test kits, but the discussion I had with the Doherty Institute just prior to coming to air also included new testing regime so that we can expand beyond the individual tests, and they are looking at ways of expediting the testing process, and, indeed, some significant new mass testing processes over and above what we’re doing.” The Australian Medical Association warned on Tuesday that confusing advice about when people should seek a test had caused “undue community distress and system inefficiency”.
“The public has been receiving conflicting and inaccurate information about when they need to be tested, and how they should approach testing, and what comprises effective prevention and mitigation strategies,” the association’s federal council said.
Australia currently has one of the highest per capita testing rates of any nation, health minister Greg Hunt said. “We have actually one of the most advanced testing regimes in the world … We have had over 30,000 tests conducted in Australia.”
But he said the government was considering additional equipment, expediting test results, and new testing processes “over and above what we’re doing”.
According to figures on the rate of testing per million people compiled by Our World in Data and Guardian Australia, the Australian states of New South Wales, Victoria and Western Australia would rank towards the top when compared with other countries.
bar chart
The number of tests carried out by other states and territories has not yet been made public.
Mackay, an associate professor at the University of Queensland, said Australia needed to broaden its testing criteria so that more people were eligible for tests and the true extent of community transmission could be determined.
“The testing is essential for us to know what is going on. We are testing with a specific definition, and we need definitions, we need lines in the sand, otherwise it is just chaos. But this is fast-moving, we have only just stopped arrivals walking into the country, imposing a 14-day self-isolation on arrivals, and we know for a fact people have come into the country showing no signs of illness.
“We don’t know how many of those people have developed an illness, only a mild illness, not enough to go to the doctor but enough that the virus is passed on ... and without testing more widely, we don’t know if those entries into the Australian community have caused chains of transmission.”
Mackay said the issues around testing capacity were serious, with reagents and other testing kit elements running short and with laboratories already running around-the-clock in order to keep up with demand.
He said new testing protocols, such as molecular-based point-of-care testing, used on the east coast of Australia to test for influenza, had the potential, when developed, to dramatically boost capacity for Covid-19 testing.
“What we know of most successful countries to turn around this pandemic – South Korea, Hong Kong, Singapore, China – is widespread testing to help them find cases, to keep contacts isolated and quarantine those who test positive.”
Prof Lyn Gilbert, an infectious diseases expert, said an enormous amount of testing had been done, but it was limited recently because of worldwide shortages. She said laboratory testing should be focused and targeted.
“We have limited it recently because of a worldwide shortage, and there has been a lot of effort on behalf of the government to obtain more kits,” Gilbert told the Guardian. “There’s a difficult dilemma between testing people just because they’re interested when they’ve got no reason to be tested, and having enough so if there is community transmission we can test people who need it.
“You must have some indication for doing laboratory tests, otherwise it’s wasting resources. When systems are overloaded we must be rational and sensible.”
Mackay said Australia had been too slow to enforce widespread testing. “It should have been happening last week – we wanted these abilities last week. What I have been agitating for is more testing of contacts to understand how far widespread these cases can go.”
But he said it was still within Australia’s ability to arrest the exponential growth in confirmed cases.
“I think Australia can flatten that peak. I believe we have the capacity and the ability, and we have had the time to get everything ready. We’ve now shut the country down to an extent, with the 14-day self-isolation for arrivals. The one thing we’re missing is more widespread testing.”
To qualify as eligible for testing in Australia, a patient must meet both epidemiological criteria and clinical criteria as a “suspected case”. These are defined in the Communicable Diseases Network Australia’s national guidelines for public health units.
Epidemiological criteria
• International travel in the 14 days before illness onset OR
• Close contact in 14 days before illness onset with a confirmed case of Covid-19.
Clinical criteria
• Fever
• Acute respiratory infection (eg shortness of breath, cough, sore throat) with or without fever.
Patients with severe community-acquired pneumonia with no obvious cause, or healthcare workers with patient contact and a fever and respiratory infection, are also classified as suspect cases.
Close contact is defined as more than 15 minutes of face-to-face contact with a confirmed case or sharing of a closed space with a confirmed case for more than two hours.
But there are concerns that rules such as these – applied in other countries too – effectively discourage doctors from testing patients who have no known ties to existing cases, precisely the kind of “community case” that would signal that the pandemic has reached the stage where it is spreading, in some cases undetected, among strangers.
The director general of the World Health Organisation, Dr Tedros Adhanom Ghebreyesus, has implored governments to test more suspected cases, warning that they cannot fight the pandemic blindfolded.
In an unflinching attack on governments that have neglected or held back testing, he said: “We have not seen an urgent enough escalation in testing, isolation and contact tracing, which is the backbone of the response. The most effective way to prevent infections and save lives is breaking the chains of transmission. And to do that, you must test and isolate.
“You cannot fight the fire blindfolded, and we cannot stop this pandemic if we don’t know who is infected. We have a simple message for all countries: test, test, test. Test every suspected case.”


Topics



Coronavirus outbreak






Health




Infectious diseases




news






Share on Facebook






Share on Twitter






Share via Email






Share on LinkedIn






Share on Pinterest






Share on WhatsApp






Share on Messenger








Reuse this content




 