Coronavirus latest: 16 March at a glance

Key developments in the global coronavirus outbreak today include:
Global cases surpass 175,000
The number of people around the world known to have died as a result of the pandemic reached 6,706. According to figures compiled by the Johns Hopkins University Center for Systems Science and Engineering, 175,250 confirmed cases have been identified globally, 77,658 of whom have recovered.
Italian death toll exceeds 2,000
The death toll in Italy from Covid-19 has increased to more than 2,000 with the announcement that another 349 victims have died. The country has identified about 25,000 cases.
Test, test, test, WHO urges
In a strongly worded attack on governments that have neglected or carried out only limited testing, which include the UK, the head of the WHO, Dr Tedros Adhanom Ghebreyesus, said: “We have not seen an urgent enough escalation in testing, isolation and contact tracing, which is the backbone of the response.”
He added: “The most effective way to prevent infections and save lives is breaking the chains of transmission. And to do that, you must test and isolate. You cannot fight the fire blindfolded. And we cannot stop this pandemic if we don’t know who is infected. We have a simple message for all countries: test, test, test. Test every suspected case.”
Britons told to isolate
“I can’t remember anything like it in my lifetime,” the UK’s prime minister told citizens as he advised them to avoid non-essential contact with other people. That included visits to relatives in care homes, as well as social events such as going to pubs, theatres and restaurants, Boris Johnson said, acknowledging that it amounted to demanding a huge change in the way people live their lives for an indefinite period.
But he stopped short of giving the advice a legal underpinning or threatening sanctions should people choose not to follow it.
Johnson said families should stay at home if any member of the household is ill and said people aged 70 and older, believed to be the group at greatest risk, should avoid all unnecessary contact. The government’s chief scientific adviser, Sir Patrick Vallance, said schools could yet be closed, which the government has so far shied away from.
UK cases increase by nearly 200
The health secretary, Matt Hancock, said 53 people had died and figures from the Department of Health and Social Care showed the country had identified 1,543 confirmed sufferers, up 181 from 1,372 in 24 hours. Officials said 44,105 people had been tested in the UK, of which 42,562 had been confirmed negative.
Europe continues shutdown measures
The EU proposed suspending all non-essential travel for 30 days, the president of the EU commission has announced. Ursula von der Leyen tweeted:

Ursula von der Leyen 
(@vonderleyen)
The @EU_Commission presents guidelines on border measures & proposes: 1<U+20E3>Green lanes/fast lanes giving priority to essential transport to keep the mobility sector going & ensure economic continuity2<U+20E3>Temporary restriction on non-essential travel to the EU (30 days) pic.twitter.com/9bda9MntF0

March 16, 2020

And national governments continued to take ever more stringent steps. In Spain, the government requisitioned the country’s private healthcare sector as part of the fight against the spread of the coronavirus.
In France, where the number of cases was doubling every three days, the director general of health, Jérôme Salomon, said there was a “real worry the speed of the outbreak could saturate hospitals”, a concern that has also been central to the UK government’s strategy.
In Germany, the federal government announced the closure of places of worship, playgrounds and non-essential shops.
Canada announces border closure
The country’s prime minister, Justin Trudeau, said borders would be closed to foreigners and only four airports would be allowed to accept international flights in a bid to slow the spread of the virus. The closure would not apply to commerce or trade, he said.
Global recession concerns mount
Financial markets around the world plunged amid fears of a recession as a result of the pandemic and the measures taken across the world to stop its spread. That came despite a coordinated effort by central banks to protect growth and jobs.
Humanitarian groups warn of Covid-19 ‘carnage’ in refugee camps
Humanitarian groups warned of the risk to people living in cramped conditions in refugee camps across the world once the virus reached them, saying there could be “carnage”. The lack of medical facilities at such sites and the poor health of the refugees means infection is likely to have a more serious impact, according to UOSSM, which provides free medical aid to those in areas affected by the conflict in Syria and runs 12 hospitals and 120 clinics.
Airlines cut back operations
British Airways, Ryanair, easyJet and Virgin Atlantic cut up to 80% of their services as an aviation consultancy warned the industry could not withstand more than a few months of global isolation measures without billions of dollars of emergency funding.


Topics



Coronavirus outbreak




Coronavirus: at a glance






news






Share on Facebook






Share on Twitter






Share via Email






Share on LinkedIn






Share on Pinterest






Share on WhatsApp






Share on Messenger








Reuse this content




 