Coronavirus latest: 16 March at a glance

Key developments in the global coronavirus outbreak today include:
Global death toll from the coronavirus outbreak passes 6,500
Almost 170,000 people have been infected by the coronavirus across the world and 6,509 have died, with cases and deaths outside China overtaking those in the country where the outbreak began, according to a Reuters tally.
The most substantial infection centre outside China is in Italy, where there are nearly 25,000 confirmed infections and more than 1,800 deaths.
Elsewhere in Europe, which the World Health Organization described as the centre of the pandemic, France has 4,500 cases and 91 deaths, Germany has 11 deaths and more than 5,700 infections, the Netherlands has 20 deaths and 2,270 infections, Switzerland has 14 deaths and 2,200 infections, and the UK has 21 deaths and 1,144.
The next worst affected country is Iran, where there are just under 14,000 confirmed cases and 724 deaths. There are fears that the country’s fragile health services and economy are struggling to cope with the outbreak, and on Friday, satellite imaging appeared to show mass graves dug in the city of Qom to bury coronavirus victims.
Boris Johnson to chair the daily coronavirus press conferences
Boris Johnson, the prime minister, is to address the nation on the coronavirus threat again today, amid widespread criticism of the measures so far taken by his government to tackle the outbreak.
The last time Johnson spoke directly to Britons he told us all that many of our loved ones would die, before promptly disappearing from sight over the weekend. Government plans have since been drip-fed to the public through media articles, some official, some unattributed, many contradictory.
However, as my colleague Andrew Sparrow reported last night, on Monday afternoon Johnson will hold the first of what are intended to be daily ministerial press conferences on the crisis.
NHS document suggests 8m may need hospital treatment
The coronavirus epidemic in the UK could last until next spring and could lead to 7.9 million people being hospitalised, a secret Public Health England (PHE) briefing for senior NHS officials revealed.
The document, seen by the Guardian, is the first time health chiefs tackling the virus have admitted that they expect it to circulate for 12 more months and lead to huge extra strain on an already overstretched NHS.
It also suggests that health chiefs are braced for as many as 80% of Britons becoming infected with the coronavirus over that time.
Passengers on London tube down by a fifth
The numbers of passengers travelling on London’s tube network has fallen by nearly a fifth, while the numbers on buses are down 10%, compared with the same time last year, according to a statement by Transport for London.
Significantly, commuters travelling on the tube, which is more expensive and connects the city centre to the suburbs, tend to be drawn from higher socio-economic groups, who tend to work white-collar jobs and are more able to work from home.
The figures suggest that more well-off Londoners are more likely to be staying at home to avoid the coronavirus outbreak, while those in less well-paid jobs are still travelling to work every day.
TfL estimates that it will take a hit of up to £500m to its revenue as a result of the fall in passenger numbers, which comes as tube and bus revenues were already about 2% lower than the previous year.
Spanish government requisitions private healthcare sector
Faced with an overstretched healthcare system and a coronavirus epidemic that is spreading at one of the fastest rates in the world, the Spanish government has announced sweeping measures that allow it to take over private health care providers and requisition materials such as masks and Covid-19 tests.
Private health care providers are now at the disposition of public health authorities, health minister Salvador Illa said on Sunday evening. As well, any company that has supplies of protective gear that could help the country fight the virus – or any company capable of manufacturing these materials – have been given 48 hours to report to health authorities or otherwise face fines.
Singapore criticises UK coronavirus strategy
Adding to a growing chorus of international criticism, Singapore’s national development minister Lawrence Wong sharply criticised the UK approach to tackling the coronavirus outbreak as he announced new border control measures to apply to the UK, Switzerland and Japan.
Wong said:




We are watching America closely, yes you are right that the numbers are rising there as well. But if you look at the countries that we have highlighted, one concern we have in UK, in Switzerland, in Japan, it’s not just about the numbers that they have reported.
In the case of the UK it is rising very rapidly but it’s not just about the numbers but the fact that these countries have abandoned any attempt at containing the spread of the virus. They have said so publicly, especially the UK and Switzerland, perhaps less so for Japan; but certainly in the case of the UK and Switzerland. I think the UK has been most public in acknowledging that there’s no point containing and they are simply now at the phase of trying to delay the spread.
So if there is no deliberate effort to contain then we anticipate that the numbers of infected cases in these countries will rise even more sharply in the coming days or weeks, and that’s why we are quite concerned.


Macron to address France amid martial law rumours
Emmanuel Macron will address an anxious France on Monday night about the coronavirus outbreak, Reuters reports.
According to the agency, Macron is to hold a meeting with his prime minister, top military adviser, intelligence coordinator and ministers of health, the interior and foreign affairs on the escalating health crisis, before giving a televised address at 8pm (7pm GMT).
France has been gripped by rumours that the government is about to issue a decree stopping people from circulating and using the military to enforce it, that spread on social media on Sunday.


Topics



Coronavirus outbreak




Coronavirus: at a glance






news






Share on Facebook






Share on Twitter






Share via Email






Share on LinkedIn






Share on Pinterest






Share on WhatsApp






Share on Messenger








Reuse this content




 