Coronavirus latest: 19 March at a glance

Key developments in the global coronavirus outbreak today include:
UK death toll rises to 144
The UK coronavirus death toll increased to 144 as of 1pm on Thursday, according to official figures. The number of positive cases increased by 643, or 25%, to 3,269, as local authorities were promised funding for social care and the NHS appealed to retired doctors and nurses to return.
Health secretary could not live on UK sick pay
Matt Hancock admitted he could not survive on statutory sick pay, £94.25 per week, but went on to raise the prospect of further help for some of the most disadvantaged as the economic consequences of the coronavirus took effect. There are fears that some workers may not self-isolate if they experience symptoms because they are worried about losing income.
Trump incorrectly claims drug ready ‘almost immediately’
The US president sowed fresh confusion about his government’s response to the pandemic by claiming that chloroquine, a therapeutic drug that has not been approved for use against coronavirus, would be available “almost immediately” – only to be swiftly contradicted by officials. Studies are ongoing after tests in China showed promise.
Eight more deaths in Washington state
Washington state in the US reported eight more deaths from the coronavirus, bringing the death toll there to 74, the most of any American state. Thirteen elderly people at the same nursing centre died earlier this month.
Netflix to reduce streaming quality to ease internet pressure
Movies, TV episodes and other videos for Netflix users across Europe will temporarily have their quality reduced to ease pressure on internet service providers. It is expected that the connection speed will be reduced by 25%.
Brazil to close large majority of border
Latin America’s largest country is to close its borders with most of its South American neighbours – a decision others had already made and is therefore mainly symbolically significant – and is treating any patient with symptoms of “severe flu” as a coronavirus case.
UN world food programme director tests positive
David Beasley said he had tested positive for coronavirus after a trip to Canada. The former governor of South Carolina said his symptoms were mild and he was in good spirits. He is working from home and his employees are helping him inform anyone he had contact with during his trip.
Do not forget those fleeing war and persecution, warns UN chief
Filippo Grandi, the United Nations refugee chief, urged states not to block the passage of asylum seekers as countries close their borders to control the pandemic. “They need – we all need - solidarity and compassion now more than ever before,” he said.
Cannes film festival postponed
This year’s edition of the film showcase is to be delayed after the French government banned public gatherings of more than 100 people on Friday, then joined the EU-wide lockdown preventing non-EU nationals from entering the Schengen zone.
Plans to encourage Chinese cinemagoers to the movies
Business at Chinese cinemas, when most of its 70,000 screens reopen at the end of March, is to be kickstarted by Chinese blockbusters American Dreams in China and 2015’s Wolf Totem, along with two patriotic crowdpleasers chosen by the country’s main state-owned distributor.


Topics



World news




Coronavirus: at a glance






Coronavirus outbreak




news






Share on Facebook






Share on Twitter






Share via Email






Share on LinkedIn






Share on Pinterest






Share on WhatsApp






Share on Messenger








Reuse this content




 