Chinese tourist in France becomes Europe's first coronavirus fatality

Europe has recorded its first coronavirus fatality, a Chinese tourist in France, it has been confirmed.
The death of the 80-year-old man, who was visiting Paris with his daughter when he was taken to hospital three weeks ago after falling ill, also marks the first coronavirus mortality outside Asia since the start of the outbreak.
His 50-year-old daughter also tested positive for the virus and is being treated in hospital, where she is said to be making a good recovery.
The pair, who are from Hubei, the province at the heart of the Chinese epidemic, are among 11 confirmed coronavirus cases in France. Six of those who contracted the disease in the country remain in hospital, while four have been discharged after recovering.
Q&A How can I protect myself and others from the coronavirus outbreak?  
 Show 
 Hide  
The World Health Organization is recommending that people take simple precautions to reduce exposure to and transmission of the coronavirus, for which there is no specific cure or vaccine.
The UN agency advises people to:
Frequently wash their hands with an alcohol-based hand rub or warm water and soap
Cover their mouth and nose with a flexed elbow or tissue when sneezing or coughing
Avoid close contact with anyone who has a fever or cough
Seek early medical help if they have a fever, cough and difficulty breathing, and share their travel history with healthcare providers
Many countries are now enforcing or recommending curfews or lockdowns. 
In the UK, NHS advice is that anyone with symptoms should stay at home for at least 7 days.
If you live with other people, they should stay at home for at least 14 days, to avoid spreading the infection outside the home.



Was this helpful?







Thank you for your feedback.

The man died at Bichat hospital on Friday evening of a lung infection caused by the Covid-19 virus, France’s health minister, Agnès Buzyn, said on Saturday. He had arrived in France on 16 January and was taken to hospital nine days later and put into strict isolation.
“His condition declined rapidly and he had been in a critical state for several days,” Buzyn said. “It’s the first death from the coronavirus outside Asia and the first in Europe.”
Of the 11 confirmed cases in France, six remain in hospital – including the Chinese patient’s daughter – where their conditions remain stable. French health authorities say four have recovered. Buzyn said the man’s daughter should be able to leave hospital soon.
On Saturday, China reported that confirmed cases of the virus had risen to almost 66,500 – more than 1,500 people have died. There have been more than 580 confirmed cases outside mainland China, and three deaths – in the Philippines, Hong Kong and Japan.
Europe has reported 46 cases of the Covid-19 virus, which first emerged in central China in December last year. Patients in nine European countries have tested positive for the virus, 16 of them in Germany.


Topics



Coronavirus outbreak






France




China




Infectious diseases




Europe




Asia Pacific




news






Share on Facebook






Share on Twitter






Share via Email






Share on LinkedIn






Share on Pinterest






Share on WhatsApp






Share on Messenger








Reuse this content




 