Channel 4 worker taken to hospital for coronavirus test

A Channel 4 employee who was met by NHS staff in protective clothing at the broadcaster’s London headquarters is among the latest people in Britain to have undergone precautionary testing for the coronavirus.
Quick guide What are coronavirus symptoms and should I go to a doctor?  
 Show 
 Hide  


What is Covid-19?

It is caused by a member of the coronavirus family that has never been encountered before. Like other coronaviruses, it has come from animals.



What are the symptoms this coronavirus causes?

The virus can cause pneumonia-like symptoms. Those who have fallen ill are reported to suffer coughs, fever and breathing difficulties.
In the UK, the National Heath Service has defined the symptoms as:
a high temperature - you feel hot to touch on your chest or back
a new continuous cough - this means you've started coughing repeatedly



Should I go to the doctor if I have a cough?

Medical advice varies around the world - with many countries imposing travel bans and lockdowns to try and prevent the spread of the virus. In many place people are being told to stay at home rather than visit a doctor of hospital in person. Check with your local authorities.
In the UK, NHS advice is that anyone with symptoms should stay at home for at least 7 days. If you live with other people, they should stay at home for at least 14 days, to avoid spreading the infection outside the home.



Is the virus being transmitted from one person to another?

Yes. China’s national health commission confirmed human-to-human transmission in January.



How many people have been affected?

China’s national health commission confirmed human-to-human transmission in January. As of 19 March, more than 219,000 people have been infected in more than 150 countries, according to the Johns Hopkins University Center for Systems Science and Engineering.
There have been over 8,900 deaths globally. Just over 3,200 of those deaths have occurred in mainland China. Many of those who have died had underlying health conditions, which the coronavirus complicated.
More than 84,000 people are recorded as having recovered from the coronavirus.




Was this helpful?







Thank you for your feedback.

The broadcaster’s member of staff is understood to have been on holiday in China in the last month and felt unwell. He is not a journalist and had not been to Wuhan, the Chinese city at the centre of the outbreak.
The man, who went to hospital on Thursday from Channel 4’s office in Horseferry Road, London, has now returned home and is awaiting his test results.
One source said the individual had been at work over the past 10 days before becoming ill, and there was anger that he had not been offered the opportunity to work from home. An ambulance with NHS staff in what were described as “hazmat” suits arrived to pick him up. 
A Channel 4 spokesperson said: “On Thursday a member of staff who had travelled to Asia within the last month felt unwell.
“As a precautionary measure they decided to seek medical advice and, in line with the latest public health advice regarding the coronavirus, they were taken to hospital for a precautionary test. We have informed our staff of this and continue to follow all the latest public health guidance.”
The UK’s chief medical officers are advising anyone experiencing a cough, fever or shortness of breath who has travelled to the UK from mainland China, Thailand, Japan, South Korea, Hong Kong, Taiwan, Singapore, Malaysia or Macau in the past 14 days to stay indoors and call NHS 111.
More than 1,750 people have been tested for the virus in the UK, of which nine were confirmed positive.


Topics



Coronavirus outbreak






Channel 4




London




news






Share on Facebook






Share on Twitter






Share via Email






Share on LinkedIn






Share on Pinterest






Share on WhatsApp






Share on Messenger








Reuse this content




 