These self-appointed coronavirus experts really need to pipe down | Eleanor Margolis

I’m no financial expert, but – if you ask me – why not withdraw every last penny from your bank account, head to your nearest casino and put it all on red? You could literally double your money. Sure, something else could happen entirely. But all investments are risky, right? And, like I said, I’m no financial expert.
If you found this advice helpful, you may want to look to Twitter for the many nuggets of coronavirus wisdom currently being proffered by self-proclaimed non public health experts. Along with Rory Stewart (you know, that guy who wants to crash on your sofa and be mayor of London) deciding that schools closures are a must, men across the globe have stepped up – in brave defiance of their total absence of virus containment expertise – to offer, free of charge, non-expertise on the very serious situation in which we find ourselves.



Under coronavirus lockdown, Italy is finding a fragile sense of solidarity | Jamie Mackay







Read more





Among them is the political scientist Yascha Mounk who, to be fair, is a “scientist”. “First, the obvious disclaimer,” he tweeted on Monday, “I’m not ab [sic] expert in public health.” Instead of acknowledging his non-expertise and saying nothing, Mounk wrote, “But I *am* trained in the study of public policy and political philosophy.” At which point, I’m sure all of those with compromised immune systems who are at risk of actual death from coronavirus exhaled a collective sigh of relief that the political philosopher had spoken. Unsurprisingly, Mounk then went on to share some thoughts about how we should deal with the pandemic.
Meanwhile, the BBC are facing an inevitable backlash after inviting Nigel Farage on to Newsnight to talk about coronavirus. I’d be hard-pushed to test a cold remedy recommended by Nigel Farage. Something tells me it would involve putting a copy of the Telegraph in a blender with a pint of bulldog piss, and injecting the concoction directly into your head. Elsewhere, Tom Harwood, a reporter for the rightwing website Guido Fawkes, was quick to defend his inclusion in a Sky News segment on coronavirus, when one Twitter user suggested that public health experts rather than political commentators might have been a better call. When asked by another Twitter user what qualified him to talk about the politics of a pandemic, his response, “BA (hons) Politics, St Mary’s College, Durham”, was dynamite. It’s “(hons)” that does it – quelling all fear that an unqualified 23-year-old was invited on to broadcast television to opine on a complex and urgent public health matter.
Quick guide What are coronavirus symptoms and should I go to a doctor?  
 Show 
 Hide  


What is Covid-19?

It is caused by a member of the coronavirus family that has never been encountered before. Like other coronaviruses, it has come from animals.



What are the symptoms this coronavirus causes?

The virus can cause pneumonia-like symptoms. Those who have fallen ill are reported to suffer coughs, fever and breathing difficulties.
In the UK, the National Heath Service has defined the symptoms as:
a high temperature - you feel hot to touch on your chest or back
a new continuous cough - this means you've started coughing repeatedly



Should I go to the doctor if I have a cough?

Medical advice varies around the world - with many countries imposing travel bans and lockdowns to try and prevent the spread of the virus. In many place people are being told to stay at home rather than visit a doctor of hospital in person. Check with your local authorities.
In the UK, NHS advice is that anyone with symptoms should stay at home for at least 7 days. If you live with other people, they should stay at home for at least 14 days, to avoid spreading the infection outside the home.



Is the virus being transmitted from one person to another?

Yes. China’s national health commission confirmed human-to-human transmission in January.



How many people have been affected?

China’s national health commission confirmed human-to-human transmission in January. As of 19 March, more than 219,000 people have been infected in more than 150 countries, according to the Johns Hopkins University Center for Systems Science and Engineering.
There have been over 8,900 deaths globally. Just over 3,200 of those deaths have occurred in mainland China. Many of those who have died had underlying health conditions, which the coronavirus complicated.
More than 84,000 people are recorded as having recovered from the coronavirus.




Was this helpful?







Thank you for your feedback.

I myself am no public health expert, but I am almost certain that sweeping statements about school closures and how the severity of the virus is being “downplayed” are going to do nothing but generate clicks and spread panic. Any sentence that begins with “I’m not a public health expert, but …” can only end with useful advice by pure accident. In reality, the sort of political posturing disguised as a public service announcement is probably less helpful than a meme about hand washing. For all we know, the latter could be saving thousands of lives, seeing as actual experts have said hand washing is extremely important.
Perhaps, in a time when we’re so forcefully encouraged by politicians not to trust experts, declaring yourself not an expert gives you a level of prestige. As Donald Trump said, during a recent tour of the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, in Atlanta, “People are really surprised I understand this stuff. Every one of these doctors said, ‘How do you know so much about this?’ Maybe I have a natural ability.” Don’t be that guy. Don’t project what you’ve inferred to be your “natural understanding” of epidemics on to an actual, ongoing epidemic. Pipe down. Channel it into a sci-fi novel or a post-apocalyptic screenplay. There are grownups in the room, and we need to step aside and let them take over.
Granted, I’m not an expert on experts, but I do really want to survive the next few weeks. And if someone in a white coat, with letters after their name tells me to do something, chances are I’m going to trust them more than I am the political pundits at the back.
• Eleanor Margolis is a columnist for the New Statesman and Diva


Topics



Coronavirus outbreak




Opinion






Infectious diseases




Donald Trump




Nigel Farage




comment






Share on Facebook






Share on Twitter






Share via Email






Share on LinkedIn






Share on Pinterest






Share on WhatsApp






Share on Messenger








Reuse this content




 