Coronavirus flight captain: 'We were a lifeboat for people'

Francisco Javier Martínez had been under no illusions as to the exceptional nature of flight PLM471P, but it was only as his 747 neared its destination that the captain realised exactly what he, the crew and a small team of British military medics were approaching.
“Wuhan looked like a desert; there wasn’t a car on the motorway and the airport was totally empty,” he said of his arrival last Friday.
“It was as if a bomb had gone off and left the city totally empty. No people, no cars, no movement, nothing. It was all a bit overwhelming. This was all a bit bigger than we’d thought.”
Martínez, 61, who has been a pilot for 40 years, received the call on Monday morning from his employers at Wamos Air. Would he be willing to captain the charter flight to bring home 120 people, most of them British and Spanish, from the Chinese city at the centre of the coronavirus outbreak?
The mission was voluntary, but Martínez said yes, as did three other Wamos pilots, 13 cabin crew, two mechanics and a loadmaster.
Quick guide What are coronavirus symptoms and should I go to a doctor?  
 Show 
 Hide  


What is Covid-19?

It is caused by a member of the coronavirus family that has never been encountered before. Like other coronaviruses, it has come from animals.



What are the symptoms this coronavirus causes?

The virus can cause pneumonia-like symptoms. Those who have fallen ill are reported to suffer coughs, fever and breathing difficulties.
In the UK, the National Heath Service has defined the symptoms as:
a high temperature - you feel hot to touch on your chest or back
a new continuous cough - this means you've started coughing repeatedly



Should I go to the doctor if I have a cough?

Medical advice varies around the world - with many countries imposing travel bans and lockdowns to try and prevent the spread of the virus. In many place people are being told to stay at home rather than visit a doctor of hospital in person. Check with your local authorities.
In the UK, NHS advice is that anyone with symptoms should stay at home for at least 7 days. If you live with other people, they should stay at home for at least 14 days, to avoid spreading the infection outside the home.



Is the virus being transmitted from one person to another?

Yes. China’s national health commission confirmed human-to-human transmission in January.



How many people have been affected?

China’s national health commission confirmed human-to-human transmission in January. As of 19 March, more than 219,000 people have been infected in more than 150 countries, according to the Johns Hopkins University Center for Systems Science and Engineering.
There have been over 8,900 deaths globally. Just over 3,200 of those deaths have occurred in mainland China. Many of those who have died had underlying health conditions, which the coronavirus complicated.
More than 84,000 people are recorded as having recovered from the coronavirus.




Was this helpful?







Thank you for your feedback.

At 6pm on Tuesday, the jumbo jet took off from Madrid’s Barajas airport, bound for Hanoi where it would make a stopover. Also onboard were four British specialist military doctors who had joined the mission in the Spanish capital.
“The British medics had told us how to put on our masks and gloves, and briefed us on the virus and how it was transmitted,” said Martínez.
“They told us that it was a serious business but not a dangerous one: the main thing was to treat it with respect. I told the crew that this had to be serious but that it could also be fun.”
After a 20-hour rest in Hanoi, the plane headed for Wuhan.
“We knew from the beginning that we had embarked on something important, but when we flew from Hanoi to Wuhan, it sunk in that we were on a very important rescue mission,” said the pilot. “We were a lifeboat for a group of people who needed to get out of Wuhan.”
When they landed in Wuhan at 4.59am on Friday, they were greeted by a ghost city and two Chinese officials buried in layers of protective clothing. The Wamos crew, wearing their own masks and gloves, stayed on the plane as equipment from the British government was unloaded.
And then the passengers began to board.
“For them, it was as if they were coming home and leaving it all behind,” said Martínez.
Careful note was taken of who was sitting where so that anyone displaying symptoms of coronavirus – and those around them – could be isolated. The flight from Wuhan to Brize Norton took 11 hours and 40 minutes and was, according to the pilot, “very pleasant and rather beautiful” because of the skies through which they were flying.
“The crew were always checking to see if people were OK and calm, and whether there were any cases,” he said.
“But people were relaxed – like the worst was behind them. The Britons and the British medics got off at Brize Norton and the Spanish doctors came aboard there and we flew back to Torrejón [air base, just outside Madrid]. All the passengers were really happy and excited to be back on their own soil, even though they knew they were going to be in quarantine for a while.”




Play Video





1:10





 Coronavirus: Brit arrives at Wirral hospital for quarantine after leaving Wuhan – video
Martínez and his crew are on leave but have not been required to go into quarantine. While he is a little shocked by the fanfare, he is delighted that his team’s efforts have been recognised.
“My biggest memory of all this will be of a crew that worked together beautifully,” he said.
“They were more like a family than a crew. When I address a crew, I call them family. What started off as a flight crew, became a team and ended up being like a family.”
By Saturday lunchtime, the week’s excitement was beginning to recede and the pilot had firmly entered the airspace of the familiar and the domestic.
“A friend jokingly told me I was a hero and I said, ‘No, I was just doing my job’. But I guess this goes beyond a job. Sometimes it’s like being a priest or a firefighter. But anyway, it’s back to normality now. I’m going shopping and then I’ll help my wife make lunch.”


Topics



Coronavirus outbreak






Spain




Air transport




Europe




China




Asia Pacific




news






Share on Facebook






Share on Twitter






Share via Email






Share on LinkedIn






Share on Pinterest






Share on WhatsApp






Share on Messenger








Reuse this content




 