Nick Robinson and Jon Snow self-isolating in coronavirus precaution

Coronavirus precautions have forced Radio 4’s Nick Robinson and the Channel 4 News presenter Jon Snow to self-isolate, raising concerns that the spread of the virus could threaten the ability of journalists to do their jobs.
Sky News has told staff that guests entering any of its properties must give a formal declaration that they have not recently been to any infected area, a move which could limit the number of guests available to the channel.
Q&A How can I protect myself and others from the coronavirus outbreak?  
 Show 
 Hide  
The World Health Organization is recommending that people take simple precautions to reduce exposure to and transmission of the coronavirus, for which there is no specific cure or vaccine.
The UN agency advises people to:
Frequently wash their hands with an alcohol-based hand rub or warm water and soap
Cover their mouth and nose with a flexed elbow or tissue when sneezing or coughing
Avoid close contact with anyone who has a fever or cough
Seek early medical help if they have a fever, cough and difficulty breathing, and share their travel history with healthcare providers
Many countries are now enforcing or recommending curfews or lockdowns. 
In the UK, NHS advice is that anyone with symptoms should stay at home for at least 7 days.
If you live with other people, they should stay at home for at least 14 days, to avoid spreading the infection outside the home.



Was this helpful?







Thank you for your feedback.

Robinson said his decision to stay at home and away from colleagues came after a “routine precautionary check on doctors’ advice” following a holiday in Vietnam and Cambodia.
The Today programme presenter said NHS staff had told him to stay at home until the end of the week. He tweeted: “Thoughts go to all those on NHS frontline working to keep us safe from coronavirus. Thanks to staff at WhitHealth who tested me last night on return from great holiday in Vietnam & Cambodia. Routine precautionary check on doctors advice. Hope for all clear within 48 hours.”
According to the latest World Health Organization report on the Covid-19 outbreak, issued on Wednesday morning, there were 16 confirmed cases in Vietnam and one in Cambodia.

On Tuesday night Jon Snow announced he would be in precautionary self-isolation for two weeks after visiting Iran to cover the country’s election. The country has been badly hit by the virus in recent days, with even the deputy health minister announcing he was infected – shortly after giving a press conference about the risks of the virus.
Quick guide What are coronavirus symptoms and should I go to a doctor?  
 Show 
 Hide  


What is Covid-19?

It is caused by a member of the coronavirus family that has never been encountered before. Like other coronaviruses, it has come from animals.



What are the symptoms this coronavirus causes?

The virus can cause pneumonia-like symptoms. Those who have fallen ill are reported to suffer coughs, fever and breathing difficulties.
In the UK, the National Heath Service has defined the symptoms as:
a high temperature - you feel hot to touch on your chest or back
a new continuous cough - this means you've started coughing repeatedly



Should I go to the doctor if I have a cough?

Medical advice varies around the world - with many countries imposing travel bans and lockdowns to try and prevent the spread of the virus. In many place people are being told to stay at home rather than visit a doctor of hospital in person. Check with your local authorities.
In the UK, NHS advice is that anyone with symptoms should stay at home for at least 7 days. If you live with other people, they should stay at home for at least 14 days, to avoid spreading the infection outside the home.



Is the virus being transmitted from one person to another?

Yes. China’s national health commission confirmed human-to-human transmission in January.



How many people have been affected?

China’s national health commission confirmed human-to-human transmission in January. As of 19 March, more than 219,000 people have been infected in more than 150 countries, according to the Johns Hopkins University Center for Systems Science and Engineering.
There have been over 8,900 deaths globally. Just over 3,200 of those deaths have occurred in mainland China. Many of those who have died had underlying health conditions, which the coronavirus complicated.
More than 84,000 people are recorded as having recovered from the coronavirus.




Was this helpful?







Thank you for your feedback.

Snow, who said he did not have any symptoms of the virus, told Channel 4 News by video-link from home: “I woke up this morning feeling rather tired, but that was from the trip. But we weren’t actually anywhere near where the main virus outbreak has occurred.”
His producer and cameraman are also self-isolating after the trip to Iran.
Other news organisations are preparing contingency plans for dealing with the virus. Foreign reporters pose a particular risk as they have a high level of travel involved in their jobs. They also have the potential to introduce the virus to a newsroom filled with other journalists who will may head off to other parts of the world.


Topics



Coronavirus outbreak






BBC




Channel 4




Jon Snow




Nick Robinson




Infectious diseases




news






Share on Facebook






Share on Twitter






Share via Email






Share on LinkedIn






Share on Pinterest






Share on WhatsApp






Share on Messenger








Reuse this content




 