Coronavirus latest: 13 March at a glance

Key developments in the global coronavirus outbreak today include:
US travel ban for 26 European countries comes into force
The restrictions on European travel to the US applies to non-US citizens who have been in the 26 countries of the Schengen area during the 14 days before their planned arrival in the United States. The travel restrictions are set to last for 30 days but do not apply to the UK or Ireland.
US House passes coronavirus aid package as Trump declares emergency
The aid package, passed with overwhelming support, provides free testing and paid sick leave, in a bid to limit the economic damage from a pandemic that has shuttered schools, sports arenas and offices. The development follows Donald Trump’s declaration of  a national emergency in response to the pandemic. More than 2,170 cases have been recorded across the US.
Saudi Arabia bans all flights into the kingdom
Saudi Arabia has suspended all international flights for two weeks, starting Sunday, state news agency SPA reported. Last month, it took the unprecedented step of banning foreign pilgrims from entering the country.
New Zealand to quarantine all arrivals
NZ’s prime minister, Jacinda Ardern, said all people arriving in the country, including returning citizens, will be required to isolate themselves for a fortnight. Only people arriving from the Pacific, were there are virtually no cases, are exempt from the rule. Ardern also cancelled Sunday’s memorial commemorating the first anniversary Christchurch mosque shootings. The country has recorded only six cases so far, and no instances of local transmission.
Canada shuts down parliament and bans large cruise ships
Officials said parliament will be closed for five weeks and that incoming international flights will be redirected to a small number of airports for enhanced screening. The government also announced it will ban cruise ships with 500 people from docking in the country’s ports until 1 July.
Governments across Latin America suspend flights from Europe
Colombia, Bolivia, Venezuela, Paraguay and Peru have all suspended European flights. Argentina also announced it would suspends links with the most badly affected countries and Guatemala said it will ban arrivals from the United States and Canada. The flight bans were announced as Venezuela confirmed its first two cases of the coronavirus Friday, deepening fears about a possible outbreak in the crisis-hit country where hospitals are barely functioning.
Southeast Asian countries makes changes to travel from Europe
Cambodia announced it would refuse entry to citizens from Italy, Germany, Spain, France, and the United States, according to local media. Vietnam will also stop issuing tourist visas to citizens from Europe’s Schengen area and Britain, starting from Sunday, it was reported.
Covid-19 testing kits no longer available in some parts of Australia
Australia’s chief medical officer has written to doctors warning there has been “extreme pressure” on personal protective equipment and that testing kits were no longer available in some regions of the country. He implored doctors to only test those who meet both clinical and epidemiological criteria.
South Korea and China report low infections again
In South Korea, for a second day in a row the daily number of recovered people on Saturday (204) exceeded that of new confirmed cases (107). Meanwhile in Wuhan, the Chinese city where the outbreak began, officials reported just five new cases on Friday, the second day in a row the tally has been less than 10.
The global death toll reached 5,429, with 145,369 cases confirmed
So far 71,694 people have recovered, according to figures from Johns Hopkins University. The institution draws from official figures, and so it possible that actual figures are higher.


Topics



US news




Coronavirus: at a glance






Donald Trump




Saudi Arabia




New Zealand




Coronavirus outbreak




Asia Pacific




Middle East and North Africa






Share on Facebook






Share on Twitter






Share via Email






Share on LinkedIn






Share on Pinterest






Share on WhatsApp






Share on Messenger








Reuse this content




 