Under coronavirus lockdown, Italy is finding a fragile sense of solidarity | Jamie Mackay

On Monday evening the Italian prime minister, Giuseppe Conte, announced that the whole of Italy was to be designated a “protected zone”, and placed under lockdown as cases of Covid-19 in the country rose to 9,172, with 463 deaths. For the next month, until 3 April, 60 million Italians will be obliged to remain at home, and have been ordered to go outside only for “urgent” work, to attend health appointments or to purchase basic provisions. Bars and restaurants will be forced to close at 6pm, and people have been asked to maintain a distance of a metre from one another in all public spaces. One of the biggest controversies so far has been a ban on visiting friends and relatives. Many Italians have taken to social media to assert their right to enjoy a traditional Sunday dinner with the extended family.



Don't travel, don't socialise, stay inside: Italy's coronavirus lockdown rules







Read more





In Florence, where I am based, people seem to have accepted the lockdown. The squares are empty, and the usual morning crowds are nowhere to be seen. Elsewhere in the country, the situation has been more panicked. In the hours following Conte’s announcement, supermarkets in Rome and Naples were hit by panic buying, with midnight queues forming and shouting matches breaking out. Over the past two weeks, Italy has been split between those who have been stockpiling provisions, and others who have been flouting even the most basic rules, for instance by organising house parties in affected areas. The government hopes the new measures will help curb both of these instincts.
All public events have been banned; travel by car, train and plane has been severely restricted; and police have been deployed to the streets to enforce the measures. These are the largest limitations on freedom of movement in the country since the second world war.
In recent weeks, a narrative has been taking hold that Italy’s response to the virus has been insufficient, and that the reason cases in the country have spiked is that the authorities were slow off the mark. Earlier this week, ITV’s Robert Peston quoted a UK government source as saying Italian officials’ measures showed that “they’re who not to follow”, and that their approach has been “populist” and “non-science-based”.
There is some basis for these criticisms. On Saturday evening, a draft government document outlining plans to quarantine an area in the north of the country, affecting a quarter of the population, was leaked to the press. In response, thousands of people from Italy’s worst-hit areas headed south to relatively poor regions such as Puglia and Calabria, which until now have been largely unaffected by the virus, to avoid being separated from friends and relatives. This was a huge political blunder: a lapse of institutional protocol and civic responsibility that has put the weakest parts of Italy’s health infrastructure at risk. Conte’s decision to extend the lockdown to the entire country is, above all else, an attempt to limit that exodus.
The facts that underpin the lockdown demonstrate how dangerous political infighting can be in moments of emergency. Saturday’s leak did not come from ministers in Rome, but from the regional government press office in Lombardy, which is run by the rightwing opposition party, the League. Some have questioned whether it was a conscious attempt to undermine the government’s credibility. Whatever the motivation, this is not the first time League officials have worked to undermine Rome. Last week, as Conte sought to contain public panic, the president of Lombardy, Attilio Fontana, attacked the government’s “complacency” on a television talkshow, while wearing a face mask. Matteo Salvini, the party leader, has blamed immigrants from both China and Africa for the outbreak, and has suggested that the ruling coalition’s “open border policy” has played a role in the spread of the virus. Managing a public health emergency requires trust between the state and citizens. These figures have actively weakened that bond, putting health at risk.
Yet despite these political tensions, it would be unfair to dismiss the work of the Italian authorities as a whole. In fact, contrary to Peston’s source in the UK government, health experts continue to point to Italy as a model example of how to tackle the coronavirus. Shortly before Conte’s announcement on Monday, the World Health Organization’s director general, Tedros Adhanom Ghebreyesus, praised the “aggressive measures” that the Italians have taken, confirming that the organisation fully supports their actions. Italy’s doctors and nursing staff have worked efficiently to track and treat Covid-19. The country has conducted 53,826 swabs for the virus – a figure that is significantly higher than any other European country – and it has been admirably transparent in sharing information. This foresight should enable Italy to work efficiently on containment in the longer term. More importantly, this data has already enabled Conte to declare an emergency and to secure concessions on EU borrowing limitations in order to tackle it. The government has announced a programme of wage subsidies, tax cuts, exemptions from utility bills and suspended mortgage repayments to help those living under quarantine.
Conte continues to insist that the Italian government will prioritise its citizens’ health over the budget, spending whatever it has to in order to limit the emerging epidemic. It’s hardly surprising, then, that Italians have seen Donald Trump’s continued insistence that this is akin to the common flu – or the UK’s delay in implementing measures such as banning large gatherings and sports fixtures – as astonishingly complacent. While the mortality rate remains fairly low, the country has seen a huge spike in patients who have required intensive care. Lombardy, in particular, is home to some of the Italy’s best hospitals, and ranks in the top 5% of regions in OECD countries for health. Even here, though, beds are running out, and the services are at their limit. To avoid a similar situation in other countries, doctors have emphasised the need for foreign governments to identify clusters of cases as early as possible, and implement lockdowns in a more organised and unified way than in Italy.
Despite initial panic in the face of this lockdown, for the first time since this crisis began a sense of togetherness is beginning, tentatively, to emerge among Italy’s population. The hashtag #iorestoacasa (“I’m staying at home”) is trending on Twitter, and businesses and celebrities are encouraging the public to take the new measures seriously. If nothing else, the decree has focused people’s attention, and laid waste to the idea that this is a concern only for old people, or that it will blow over in a few weeks. There is little doubt that lockdowns will be necessary elsewhere in the coming months. For now, though, Italians have an opportunity to show the rest of the world that solidarity can triumph over panic in the face of this emergency.
• Jamie Mackay is a writer and translator based in Florence


Topics



Coronavirus outbreak




Opinion






Italy




Europe




Infectious diseases




comment






Share on Facebook






Share on Twitter






Share via Email






Share on LinkedIn






Share on Pinterest






Share on WhatsApp






Share on Messenger








Reuse this content




 