Coronavirus latest: 13 March at a glance

Key developments in the global coronavirus outbreak today include:
Professional football in the UK suspended
The Premier League, the Football League and the Women’s Super League and Championship have suspended all matches until 3 April after members of staff, including players and coaches, displayed symptoms of the virus.
Chief scientist defends UK government approach
Sir Patrick Vallance, England’s chief scientific adviser, said the plans announced by Boris Johnson on Thursday could allow immunity to build up among the public, after criticism over the decision to delay more drastic measures.
Gatherings of more than 500 people in Scotland to be cancelled
The Scottish government is advising that gatherings of more than 500 people should be cancelled from Monday, as the number of positive cases jumped to 60, and discussions are under way about whether to postpone football matches.
Czech Republic to go under lock down
Foreign nationals without residence permits will be the only group allowed to leave the country, while Czechs and other residents will be the only groups of people permitted to enter when sweeping new laws come into force on Monday, according to reports.

Bulgaria the latest EU country to declare emergency
The number of confirmed cases in the south-east European country has risen to 23, prompting its parliament to impose a state of emergency, while travel bans will be imposed and schools closed. Police will also be permitted to intervene if infected people do not remain in isolation.
Egypt reports first death
Hundreds of miles away from Luxor, the city at the centre of the outbreak in the country, a 60-year-old woman in the Nile Delta town of Mansoura has died after testing positive. She had been admitted to hospital with acute pneumonia.
School classes in Belgium to be suspended
Classes will be suspended from Monday, though a daycare service will be maintained for working parents with no alternative, and cultural and sporting events are to be cancelled while all restaurants and bars must close by midnight.



Coronavirus live updates: Justin Trudeau's wife tests positive, Europe shuts schools, sport events cancelled







Read more





Infections in Germany surpass 3,000
Six people have died so far in Germany, of more than 3,000 people who have tested positive, and a number of states have announced blanket closures of schools and kindergartens as public transport is reduced in places.
Mount Everest climbing season called off
The climbing season on the world’s tallest mountain has been axed and Nepal’s government has suspended all mountaineering permits. It will also stop issuing on-arrival tourist visas, while China has also cancelled all expeditions from the north side of Everest.
Ivanka Trump had contact with infected Australian minister
The White House said Donald Trump had “no plans” to be tested after he met a Brazilian official last weekend who was diagnosed with Covid-19. It has now emerged that his daughter, Ivanka Trump, recently met the Australian minister Peter Dutton, who has tested  positive.


Topics



Coronavirus outbreak




Coronavirus: at a glance






Infectious diseases




Premier League




Scotland




Czech Republic




Bulgaria




Germany




news






Share on Facebook






Share on Twitter






Share via Email






Share on LinkedIn






Share on Pinterest






Share on WhatsApp






Share on Messenger








Reuse this content




 