Coronavirus latest: 13 March at a glance

Key developments in the global coronavirus outbreak today include:
Australia to stop mass gatherings from next week
Prime minister Scott Morrison has said the Australian government will adopt medical advice to cancel organised mass gatherings of more than 500 people from Monday onwards. The order doesn’t include schools, universities, or public transport. The government also stepped up travel advice to say Australians should reconsider non-essential overseas travel.
Markets dive
Asian markets opened in freefall. Japan’s Nikkei was down 10%, and Australia fell 8% before surging back up to a 4.4% gain for the day. New Zealand’s benchmark NZX50 was down 7.9%, and trading was briefly halted on South Korea’s stock exchange when the benchmark KOSPI index fell 6.8%.
Mass graves in Iran prompt fears over extent of virus coverup
Satellite images of mass graves in the city of Qom, first published by the New York Times, have suggested Iran’s coronavirus epidemic is even more serious than the authorities are admitting.
Trudeau’s wife diagnosed with Covid-19
Justin Trudeau’s wife, Sophie Grégoire Trudeau, tested positive for Covid-19 after returning from a visit to the UK with flu-like symptoms, and the Canadian prime minister is now self-isolating.
“Although I’m experiencing uncomfortable symptoms of the virus, I will be back on my feet soon,” she said in a statement. “Being in quarantine at home is nothing compared to other Canadian families who might be going through this and for those facing more serious health concerns.”
Australia’s home affairs minister tests positive
Peter Dutton has announced that he has tested positive for Covid-19 after waking up with a sore throat and a fever and getting tested. He says “I feel fine”.
Australian Grand Prix cancelled
In Melbourne fans arrived at the gate of the Australian Grand Prix to learn that the event had been cancelled. The decision followed days of concern over the risk that the large gathering would pose, including from racing team participants themselves.
United Nations, Ghana, Gabon report first cases
A female diplomat from the Philippines mission to the United Nations tested positive for coronavirus, according to a note sent to UN missions, making the woman the first known case at the world body’s New York headquarters.
Gabon and Ghana became the ninth and tenth countries in sub-Saharan Africa to register positive cases.
Catholic churches closed in Rome
In Italy, where the outbreak has taken a devastating toll, all Catholic churches in Rome closed under orders from the Vatican.
The papal vicar for Rome said the churches would reopen when a broader Italian government crackdown on public gatherings expires on 3 April. “The faithful are consequently exempt from their obligation to fulfil the festive precept,” a statement from Cardinal Angelo De Donatis said.
Hopes raised that South Korea’s outbreak is slowing
South Korea reported more recoveries from the coronavirus than new infections on Friday for the first time since the country’s first patient was confirmed on 20 January, raising hopes that Asia’s biggest epidemic outside China may be slowing.
Lockdown in the Philippines
Metro Manila, home to 12 million people, is preparing for a lockdown that will be imposed from Sunday. All schools will be closed, mass gatherings suspended, and many public sector workers told to stay home, following a spike in cases in the Philippines.
President Rodrigo Duterte has also imposed a 30 day ban on domestic land and sea travels to and from Manila, which will begin on 15 March.
Death toll in Italy passes 1,000
The death toll in Italy rose by 189 to 1,016, an increase of 23%, in the last 24 hours, the civil protection agency said on Thursday. The total number of confirmed cases in Italy, the European country hardest hit by the virus, rose to 15,113 from 12,462, an increase of 21.7%.
Boris Johnson says coronavirus is worst public health crisis for a generation
Speaking at a press conference after an emergency Cobra meeting, the British prime minister said: “We have all got to be clear, this is the worst public health crisis for a generation. Some people compare it to seasonal flu. Alas, that is not right. Due to the lack of immunity this disease is more dangerous.
“It is going to spread further and I must level with you, I must level with the British public: many more families are going to lose loved ones before their time.”


Topics



Coronavirus outbreak




Coronavirus: at a glance






Infectious diseases




Canada




news






Share on Facebook






Share on Twitter






Share via Email






Share on LinkedIn






Share on Pinterest






Share on WhatsApp






Share on Messenger








Reuse this content




 