How can UK citizens leave Wuhan amid the coronavirus outbreak?

As the UK government prepares to airlift hundreds of British nationals out of Wuhan in response to the coronavirus outbreak, the Guardian answers five key questions for those stranded in the country.
How can British nationals arrange to be evacuated from China?
The government has chartered a flight to airlift British nationals out of Wuhan, the centre of the coronavirus outbreak, and there are expected to be about 200 people onboard. The flight was due to depart on Thursday morning, but the evening before it emerged it would be delayed as permission had not yet been granted by Chinese authorities.
It is open to all British nationals in the Hubei province, but anyone showing signs of illness will not be allowed to board.
The Foreign and Commonwealth Office (FCO) have advised any British nationals in the area who need assistance to contact their 24/7 helplines on +86 (0) 10 8529 6600 or (+44) (0)207 008 1500.
Although a deadline for registering for evacuation was in place for 11am on Wednesday, the FCO is urging any nationals still looking to leave the country to get in touch.
Q&A How can I protect myself and others from the coronavirus outbreak?  
 Show 
 Hide  
The World Health Organization is recommending that people take simple precautions to reduce exposure to and transmission of the coronavirus, for which there is no specific cure or vaccine.
The UN agency advises people to:
Frequently wash their hands with an alcohol-based hand rub or warm water and soap
Cover their mouth and nose with a flexed elbow or tissue when sneezing or coughing
Avoid close contact with anyone who has a fever or cough
Seek early medical help if they have a fever, cough and difficulty breathing, and share their travel history with healthcare providers
Many countries are now enforcing or recommending curfews or lockdowns. 
In the UK, NHS advice is that anyone with symptoms should stay at home for at least 7 days.
If you live with other people, they should stay at home for at least 14 days, to avoid spreading the infection outside the home.



Was this helpful?







Thank you for your feedback.

Will those with dual nationality, or family members of British nationals, be allowed to evacuate?
Under Chinese restrictions, only British passport holders who do not hold Chinese nationality are permitted to leave through the evacuation.
China does not recognise dual citizenship, and official government advice states that if you are British and Chinese, you are likely to be considered a Chinese citizen by the Chinese authorities.
The FCO said the British Embassy in Beijing was urgently pressing the Chinese authorities to allow dependents of British nationals and British-Chinese dual nationals to leave. However, Beijing has restated its position and other countries, including the US, have only been allowed to take mono-nationals.
What about people in other parts of China?
The current plan is for evacuation from Wuhan airport only. Some commercial airlines are still operating out of other airports across China, although British Airways has suspended all flights to and from mainland China.
The Foreign Office said it might become more difficult for British nationals in other Chinese provinces to leave and said they should “make decisions based on their own personal circumstances” over whether to evacuate.

How can people get to the airport?
Many roads in Hubei province are blocked as the Chinese authorities try to control movement and stop the spread of the virus.
Some citizens have been told they will need a diplomatic note in order to pass through roads and reach the airport, but the FCO was unable to confirm what support is in place to help people with this.
What will happen to people once they arrive back in the UK?
All Britons returning from Wuhan will be quarantined for 14 days once they return to the UK. They will be placed in isolation units with medical care, which government sources said could potentially be a military base.
Those who have already returned from Wuhan have been advised to stay indoors and avoid contact with other people, and to call NHS 111 to inform them if they have recently travelled to the city.


Topics



Coronavirus outbreak






China




Infectious diseases




news






Share on Facebook






Share on Twitter






Share via Email






Share on LinkedIn






Share on Pinterest






Share on WhatsApp






Share on Messenger








Reuse this content




 