Unprepared America wakes up to coronavirus, gradually then all at once

It was a moment made for live cable TV. Andrew Cuomo, the governor of New York state, warned on CNN on Wednesday night that coronavirus was “here, it’s much more prevalent than we know, you’re going to see the numbers go sky high – and if the American people aren’t ready for it, we are going to have a problem”.
Suddenly, CNN’s primetime anchor, Cuomo’s younger brother Chris, butted in. You could see the frown of disapproval flit across big brother’s face: what was the youngster doing interrupting him like that?
“Hold on,” said Chris Cuomo, who was being fed information via his earpiece. “This is happening in real-time. The NBA has just suspended its season.”
There it was.
The magnitude of the coronavirus threat to America, this invisible danger that nobody appears able to quantify or fully comprehend, came into blazing view. It was written across the brows of the Cuomo brothers, their split-screen expressions unified in utter disbelief that the basketball season, that national sporting institution, was off.
The US has finally woken to the uncomfortable truth – this is happening. And it’s happening in a country of 327 million people who are in varying degrees overwhelmingly, totally, largely or partially not ready for it.
To adopt Governor Cuomo’s words: America, we have a problem.


 
 

 
 Facebook 
 
 Twitter 
 
 Pinterest 


 Workers clean a subway station in Brooklyn as New York City confronts the coronavirus outbreak. Photograph: Spencer Platt/Getty Images
There have memorably been two occasions in the past century when the United States has declared itself to be under attack on domestic territory: Pearl Harbor and 9/11. Now a third onslaught is under way on American soil and no amount of xenophobic rebranding by Donald Trump, who in his Oval Office address this week cast the disease as the “foreign virus”, will alter that fact.
Even before the virus has taken hold in communities and cities across the country, it has been preceded by two other contagions – confusion and fear.
You can see those twin pestilences sprouting furiously on both US coasts. In Bend, Oregon, Rebecca Mehra, a professional runner, related on Twitter how on her way to shop for groceries she heard a woman call to her from a car parked outside the store.
The woman and her husband, both in their 80s, had been sitting in the vehicle for almost an hour, afraid to go inside for fear of exposing themselves to the virus yet unable to go home as they were running out of supplies. Mehra said the woman was “nearly in tears”.




Play Video





1:57





 Trump's changing reactions to coronavirus: from calm to closing borders – video report
Over on the east coast there was another small glimpse into huge social changes. In the window of Sushi Katsuei, listed by Zagat as one of the best restaurants in Manhattan’s West Village, a sign on the window now states: “WARNING. For everyone’s safety, all dinners [sic], vendors, and courier personnel’s body temperature will be verified upon entry.”
Was this some distasteful practical joke? “Oh no, we are totally doing it,” one of the managers assured the Guardian. “We use a laser thermometer to take people’s temperatures so we don’t have to touch them.”
When the Guardian asked whether at some point Sushi Katsuei might have to close its doors to the public, the manager replied: “That’s a silly question, this isn’t Chinatown.”
Chinatown. Therein lies another part of the coronavirus story unfolding across this vast nation. Some of the best-known restaurants in Manhattan’s Chinatown, which barely three weeks ago had lines of diners stretching around the block, are now virtually empty.


 
 

 
 Facebook 
 
 Twitter 
 
 Pinterest 


 A woman wearing a face mask walks through the Chinatown section of San Francisco, California, on 26 February. Photograph: Shannon Stapleton/Reuters
In Flushing, Queens, home to one of the largest ethnic Chinese populations outside Asia, food courts and restaurants are also deserted.
What began as anecdotal and random examples of mounting distress have exploded this week into a nationwide phenomenon, visible for all to see.
In Oklahoma, a staunch Trump-supporting state, surreal events unfolded in Oklahoma City around the same time as Trump was making his televised address. The home NBA team, Oklahoma City Thunder, were hosting Utah Jazz as news came in that a Jazz player, Rudy Gobert, had tested positive for Covid-19.
Trainers and medical staff rushed on to the basketball court to stop the game, then fans were hurriedly ushered out of the arena without being told what was happening.



US election campaign goes virtual as country faces coronavirus shut-down - live updates







Read more





The pandemonium that ensued neatly encapsulated a pattern now repeating itself across the US – prolonged prevarication, followed by precipitous action, prompting mass anxiety, culminating in a drastic shutdown. Within hours of the Jazz-Thunder game being disrupted, the entire NBA season was suspended, generating those bewildered looks from the Cuomo brothers.
From there, other national institutions – some sporting, others cultural, artistic and educational – began to follow suit. By the end of Thursday, the rush to batten down the hatches was so intense it seemed that all of America, the country founded upon visions of openness and freedom, was closing down.
After the NBA came the MLS (soccer), NHL (ice hockey) and MLB (baseball) postponing their seasons. Then March Madness, the annual orgy of college basketball which so intoxicates millions of Americans it amply earns its name, caved in to what by now seemed inevitable.
Other events and gatherings that help to define America, at least to the outside world, also shuttered. Andrew Cuomo snuffed out the lights on the Great White Way, with performances canceled in Broadway theaters until at least 13 April.


 
 

 
 Facebook 
 
 Twitter 
 
 Pinterest 


 The Big 12 commissioner, Bob Bowlsby, is seen on the big screen in an empty Sprint Center in Kansas City as he talks to the media after canceling the remaining NCAA college basketball games on Thursday. Photograph: Charlie Riedel/AP
The two Mets – the museum and the opera house – made similar announcements. The St Patrick’s Day parade in New York, the largest celebration of its sort in the world, was postponed for the first time in 250 years, as was its Boston equivalent.
Across the deserts and plains of America, famed festivals and concerts were also postponed or scrapped, from the techie Mecca of SXSW in Austin, Texas, to Coachella in California and much, much more. The Capitol building in Washington DC, the bear pit of American politics, is now closed to tourists; and rallies held by presidential candidates – even, eventually, those staged by Trump himself – have been called off.
The new vocabulary of pandemics – “social distancing”, “reduced density” – quickly infected educational centers. Ohio on Thursday became the first state to close all its schools.
Harvard University said it was ending classroom learning and moving online, sending other universities and colleges stampeding in the same direction.
Disneyland tucked Mickey Mouse into bed and turned out the lights too.
Q&A How can I protect myself and others from the coronavirus outbreak?  
 Show 
 Hide  
The World Health Organization is recommending that people take simple precautions to reduce exposure to and transmission of the coronavirus, for which there is no specific cure or vaccine.
The UN agency advises people to:
Frequently wash their hands with an alcohol-based hand rub or warm water and soap
Cover their mouth and nose with a flexed elbow or tissue when sneezing or coughing
Avoid close contact with anyone who has a fever or cough
Seek early medical help if they have a fever, cough and difficulty breathing, and share their travel history with healthcare providers
Many countries are now enforcing or recommending curfews or lockdowns. 
In the UK, NHS advice is that anyone with symptoms should stay at home for at least 7 days.
If you live with other people, they should stay at home for at least 14 days, to avoid spreading the infection outside the home.



Was this helpful?







Thank you for your feedback.

There was something about the bit-by-bit nature of America’s shutdown, with states acting independently of each other and institutions making their own seemingly disconnected decisions, that only heightened the jitters sweeping the country. If everyone is acting in isolation, who the hell is in charge?
Andrew Cuomo again had the pithiest answer to that burning question. He told MSNBC this week that he had contacted other governors and advised them not to wait for help from the federal government.
“It’s not going to happen. You’re on your own,” he told them.
While Trump has spent his time bragging about his “terrific” response to the crisis, in practice his administration has failed spectacularly to ensure essential measures are taken such as Covid-19 testing. After a prolonged period of energetic inactivity, the president suddenly veered into hyperactivity with his extreme European travel ban.
It all leaves the US, with Trump at the helm, feeling as stable as a rudderless ship adrift in high seas.
At least there are the occasional good news stories to tell, isolated though they may be. Those eightysomethings sitting in their car outside the grocer’s store? Mehra, the professional runner, did their shopping for them, loaded it into the trunk, and sent them on their way.
“I know it’s a time of hysteria and nerves,” she reflected. “But offer help to anyone you can.”


Topics



Coronavirus outbreak






news






Share on Facebook






Share on Twitter






Share via Email






Share on LinkedIn






Share on Pinterest






Share on WhatsApp






Share on Messenger








Reuse this content




 