Coronavirus outbreak: New Zealand bans foreign travellers from China

New Zealand has closed its borders to any foreigners arriving from China – including those who have passed through in transit – and boosted its border screening in an attempt to prevent coronavirus arriving in the country.
New Zealand followed the United States, Australia, and eight other countries in completely barring foreign travellers from China, despite the World Health Organisation – and Chinese officials – decrying such restrictions.



Coronavirus: Qantas flight leaves Sydney to evacuate Australians stuck in China







Read more





“We have been advised by health officials that while there are still a range of unknowns in the way the virus is being transmitted, we should take a precautionary approach and temporarily stop travel into New Zealand from mainland China,” Jacinda Ardern, New Zealand’s prime minister, told reporters.
The travel ban will be in place for 14 days and will be reviewed every 48 hours.
On Monday, New Zealand’s customs authorities announced that screening efforts against the virus would be bolstered further, by processing manually all travellers entering the country at airports. Electronic gates that allow passengers to travel through passport control without speaking to a border official will be turned off.
“We kindly request travellers to be patient to enable a smooth and efficient transition for all,” New Zealand’s customs agency said on Twitter. The new manual screening rule applies to all passengers – including New Zealanders – arriving from any country.
There has not been a confirmed case of the virus in New Zealand.



What is coronavirus and how worried should we be?







Read more





Citizens and permanent residents, and their immediate families, who wish to return to New Zealand from China are required to isolate themselves for 14 days upon returning home, the government said.
Those who want to leave Wuhan province, the area at the centre of the outbreak, face a longer wait. Officials have yet to announce the timing of an evacuation flight planned for the coming days.
The 60-70 people who have registered their interest for the flight will, on their return to New Zealand, spend 14 days in isolation at a military base in Whangaparaoa on the country’s North Island.
New Zealanders have also been urged not to travel to China, with the ministry of foreign affairs and trade lifting its warning about the country to “do not travel,” the highest level of caution.
Air New Zealand on Monday suspended its Auckland to Shanghai route until 29 March.



Topics



Coronavirus outbreak






New Zealand




news






Share on Facebook






Share on Twitter






Share via Email






Share on LinkedIn






Share on Pinterest






Share on WhatsApp






Share on Messenger








Reuse this content




 