Lush offers public free hand washes to halt coronavirus spread

Cosmetics chain Lush is opening its doors for passersby to walk in and wash their hands for free as government advice flags better basic hygiene as a way to help halt the spread of coronavirus.
Posters are going up in the ethical beauty chain’s windows advertising what it says is a public service. Those taking advantage of its sinks will be given soap to use and are under no obligation to buy anything.
“The simplest thing you can do to not get a virus is to regularly wash your hands,” said Lush’s chief executive, Mark Constantine. “So we’re saying people can come in off the street and wash their hands in our place. We’ve got loads of soap and plenty of hot water.”
The Poole-based retailer, best-known for its fragrant bars of soap and bath bombs, said strict measures to contain the virus had hit sales in Asian markets such as Hong Kong, Japan and Korea. Japan is Lush’s second biggest market after the UK.
Q&A How can I protect myself and others from the coronavirus outbreak?  
 Show 
 Hide  
The World Health Organization is recommending that people take simple precautions to reduce exposure to and transmission of the coronavirus, for which there is no specific cure or vaccine.
The UN agency advises people to:
Frequently wash their hands with an alcohol-based hand rub or warm water and soap
Cover their mouth and nose with a flexed elbow or tissue when sneezing or coughing
Avoid close contact with anyone who has a fever or cough
Seek early medical help if they have a fever, cough and difficulty breathing, and share their travel history with healthcare providers
Many countries are now enforcing or recommending curfews or lockdowns. 
In the UK, NHS advice is that anyone with symptoms should stay at home for at least 7 days.
If you live with other people, they should stay at home for at least 14 days, to avoid spreading the infection outside the home.



Was this helpful?







Thank you for your feedback.

Lush said shopper numbers had fallen sharply in its stores in northern Italy, where the country’s outbreak is centred. It was too early to gauge the overall financial impact on the privately owned group, which has 900 shops in 48 countries, it said. 
Constantine said public alarm surrounding Covid-19 was an opportunity to highlight the role of basic hygiene in minimising the spread of viruses, whether flu or coronavirus. “If people just get in the habit of washing their hands properly, it will make a dramatic difference to public health.”


Topics



Coronavirus outbreak






Retail industry




Infectious diseases




news






Share on Facebook






Share on Twitter






Share via Email






Share on LinkedIn






Share on Pinterest






Share on WhatsApp






Share on Messenger








Reuse this content




 