US briefing: Super Bowl LIV, Iowa caucuses and coronavirus crisis

Good morning, I’m Tim Walker with today’s essential stories.
Mahomes leads Chiefs to 31-20 triumph over San Francisco
At just 24, Kansas City Chiefs quarterback Patrick Mahomes became the youngest ever Super Bowl MVP on Sunday night after leading his team to a 31-20 victory over the San Francisco 49ers, with a fourth-quarter charge that overturned a 10-point deficit to give the Missouri team its first NFL title in half a century. Mahomes has already earned comparisons to iconic QBs including Tom Brady, who also won his first Super Bowl at 24 – and has since won five more.
Half-time show. The half-time show was the best in years, writes Eve Barlow, with Shakira and J-Lo combining for “an asthma-inducing 15 minutes” that sent an electric burst of energy through the Hard Rock Stadium in Miami.
Trump tweet. Donald Trump sent his congratulations in a geographically challenged tweet, saying the Chiefs “represented the Great State of Kansas”. Kansas City is in Missouri.
Democrats make closing arguments as Iowa caucuses arrive


 
 

 
 Facebook 
 
 Twitter 
 
 Pinterest 


 Bernie Sanders, who polls have suggested is the Iowa frontrunner, speaking to supporters in Des Moines on Sunday. Photograph: Mike Segar/Reuters
The Democratic presidential candidates have been making their final pitch to voters in Iowa before the state’s crucial caucuses. The first contest of the 2020 race is the closest in years, with four hopefuls regularly polling above 15%. Yet Bernie Sanders appears to be ahead of Joe Biden, Pete Buttigieg and Elizabeth Warren going into Monday’s nominating contest. Iowans are taking their responsibility seriously, though many in the state remain shut out of the process by physical and legal barriers.
John Kerry. Many Democrats are horrified by the prospect of a surging Bernie Sanders. John Kerry, the former US secretary of state, has been forced to deny he is mulling his own late presidential bid to stymie the Vermont socialist.
Mike Bloomberg. The former New York mayor, who is running as a Democrat but not competing in Iowa, traded insults with Trump on Sunday, calling the president “a pathological liar who lies about everything: his fake hair, his obesity and his spray-on tan”.
Politics blog. Today’s blog is up and running. Read it here.
Senate Republicans poised to acquit Trump on Wednesday


 
 

 
 Facebook 
 
 Twitter 
 
 Pinterest 


 Mitch McConnell celebrates after Senate Republicans voted not to call new witnesses at the impeachment trial on Friday. Photograph: Brendan Smialowski/AFP via Getty Images
The US Senate looks all set to acquit Trump at the end of his impeachment trial on Wednesday, with some predicting not only that every Republican in the chamber will vote to exonerate the president, but that several Democrats up for re-election in swing states will join them. Just two Republican senators, Mitt Romney and Susan Collins, broke ranks with their party in Friday’s 51-49 vote blocking testimony from new witnesses; it was the first time in history that the Senate has elected not to hear such evidence.
Trump interview. In a Sunday evening interview with his close friend and unofficial adviser Sean Hannity, of Fox News, Trump said Democrats “don’t care about fairness … I think they just want to win. It doesn’t matter how they win.”
Dozens more deaths in Wuhan as coronavirus crisis grows




Play Video





1:00





 Coronavirus: China completes emergency hospital build in eight days – video timelapse
Chinese state media has reported 57 new deaths caused by the coronavirus, all but one of them in Wuhan, the city at the centre of the outbreak. That brings the overall death toll from the disease to 362, including one in the Philippines – the first reported death outside China. One of two new hospitals built over the past 10 days to combat the virus is set to open in Wuhan on Monday, but China has issued an appeal for medical equipment including masks, protective suits and safety goggles.
US response. An 11th case of the virus has been confirmed in the US, but a Beijing foreign ministry spokesman criticised America’s new ban on people travelling from China, accusing Washington of creating and spreading panic.
Share drop. Chinese shares slumped by almost 9% on Monday, the Chinese stock market’s biggest daily fall for five years, amid fear and uncertainty over the impact of the coronavirus on the global economy.
Cheat sheet
Joaquin Phoenix has been praised for criticising the film industry’s “systemic racism” as he accepted the Bafta award for best actor for his performance in Joker on Sunday night.
A 20-year-old man shot dead by police after stabbing two people in London on Sunday had recently been freed from prison, after serving half of a three-year sentence for the possession and distribution of extremist material.
Trump’s son-in-law Jared Kushner, the author of the administration’s controversial new proposals for the Middle East, has said he hopes the Palestinian leadership will at least “read the plan”, which they have already rejected outright.
The daughter of the convicted Mexican drug lord Joaquín “El Chapo” Guzmán has married Edgar Cazares, who also has deep familial links to the underworld, in a lavish ceremony at the cathedral of Culiacán in the country’s cartel heartland.
Must-reads


 
 

 
 Facebook 
 
 Twitter 
 
 Pinterest 


 Regina Jackson (centre) and Saira Rao (right) host a dinner where white women are invited to accept and discuss their role in racism. Photograph: Rebecca Stumpf/The Guardian
Guess who’s coming to dinner: confronting prejudice over pasta
Regina Jackson, who is black, and Saira Rao, who identifies as Indian American, are the founders of Race to Dinner, which invites groups of liberal white women to discuss their own racism over a meal. Poppy Noor joins them – and their guests – for carbonara and confrontation.
The ‘forever chemicals’ fueling a public health crisis
Across the US, some 700 sites have been identified as contaminated by PFAS, which are known as “forever chemicals” for their longevity in the environment – and which are blamed for causing rare cancers and other deadly conditions. Tom Perkins reports.
Why is LA’s cannabis industry blocking black entrepreneurs?
The legal weed business may be thriving in Los Angeles, yet a programme set up to offer cannabis licenses to people harmed by the war on drugs has been plagued by delays, leaving many aspiring black entrepreneurs locked out of the industry, as Sam Levin learns.
Can eating more sushi save the oceans?
Voracious sea urchins are devouring the kelp forests crucial to biodiversity across the planet’s oceans. Now, writes Patrick Greenfield, one company is hoping diners from Tokyo to London will address the problem by devouring more uni sushi, which is made with sea urchin roe.
Opinion
Jeanine Cummins’s new novel American Dirt has come in for widespread criticism over the author’s representation of Mexican culture and the plight of migrants. But the book’s biggest problem is not cultural appropriation, says Nesrine Malik, it’s bad writing.




The problem is that publishers, broadly, are only interested in such stories when the protagonists are flat-pack characters that can be assembled quickly into a neat stereotype that fits comfortably into the white, mainstream readers’ worldview.


Sport
Novak Djokovic could be fined for tapping the umpire’s foot in frustration during his thrilling Australian Open final against Dominic Thiem, which the Serb ultimately won in five sets to claim his eighth title. Meanwhile, Sofia Kenin is celebrating victory in the women’s competition after upstaging another young US star, Coco Gauff.
Liverpool cruised to a 4-0 win over Southampton while Manchester City stumbled again, losing 2-0 to Tottenham, leaving the City manager, Pep Guardiola, to all but concede the Premier League title after describing Liverpool as “unstoppable”.
Sign up
The US morning briefing is delivered to thousands of inboxes every weekday. If you’re not already signed up, subscribe now.


Sign up for the US morning briefing


Topics







US morning briefing






news






Share on Facebook






Share on Twitter






Share via Email






Share on LinkedIn






Share on Pinterest






Share on WhatsApp






Share on Messenger








Reuse this content




 