Britons returning from coronavirus-hit Italy told to self-isolate

People returning to the UK from quarantine zones in northern Italy should immediately self-isolate to stop the spread of coronavirus, the health secretary, Matt Hancock, has said.
The British government updated its guidance on Tuesday morning and suggests anyone returning from the region north of Pisa should avoid contact with others if they start to show flu-like symptoms.
Quick guide What are coronavirus symptoms and should I go to a doctor?  
 Show 
 Hide  


What is Covid-19?

It is caused by a member of the coronavirus family that has never been encountered before. Like other coronaviruses, it has come from animals.



What are the symptoms this coronavirus causes?

The virus can cause pneumonia-like symptoms. Those who have fallen ill are reported to suffer coughs, fever and breathing difficulties.
In the UK, the National Heath Service has defined the symptoms as:
a high temperature - you feel hot to touch on your chest or back
a new continuous cough - this means you've started coughing repeatedly



Should I go to the doctor if I have a cough?

Medical advice varies around the world - with many countries imposing travel bans and lockdowns to try and prevent the spread of the virus. In many place people are being told to stay at home rather than visit a doctor of hospital in person. Check with your local authorities.
In the UK, NHS advice is that anyone with symptoms should stay at home for at least 7 days. If you live with other people, they should stay at home for at least 14 days, to avoid spreading the infection outside the home.



Is the virus being transmitted from one person to another?

Yes. China’s national health commission confirmed human-to-human transmission in January.



How many people have been affected?

China’s national health commission confirmed human-to-human transmission in January. As of 19 March, more than 219,000 people have been infected in more than 150 countries, according to the Johns Hopkins University Center for Systems Science and Engineering.
There have been over 8,900 deaths globally. Just over 3,200 of those deaths have occurred in mainland China. Many of those who have died had underlying health conditions, which the coronavirus complicated.
More than 84,000 people are recorded as having recovered from the coronavirus.




Was this helpful?







Thank you for your feedback.

Those entering the UK from areas quarantined by the Italian authorities – 10 small towns in Lombardy and one in Veneto – should follow the guidance, even if they do not have symptoms.
The health secretary said the government advice was in accordance with warnings from the World Health Organization that Covid-19 could become a pandemic.
“At present we don’t think there are any Brits in the area that’s been quarantined by the Italian government,” Hancock told Sky News. “But of course the government doesn’t track where people move around Europe, so if people are in that area they should get in contact and we will do what we can to help.”
The worsening situation in northern Italy was described as “very worrying” by Hancock, who said it was a significant outbreak with more than 200 people affected, including those who had died.
He said Britain was expecting cases of the illness and had been preparing. He will update the cabinet on Tuesday and hold a meeting with the Cobra emergency committee on Wednesday.
The Italian government has allowed regions to implement civil protection measures to stem the outbreak. In Lombardy, Veneto, Friuli Venezia Giulia, Piemonte and Emilia Romagna, it has ordered a seven-day suspension of public and private events, schools and higher education facilities, as well as museums and cultural institutions.




Play Video






 Inside Italy's coronavirus 'red zone' – video diary
Hancock said: “There is a good chance that we contain this at [the virus] sort of level, where the number of cases … is relatively low. The numbers of cases in China are coming down and we think that direction of travel is credible.



NHS to test Londoners for coronavirus at home







Read more





“But the problem is there are outbreaks elsewhere, like in Italy, Iran and South Korea, and so we are preparing in case this becomes a pandemic. But we are confident there’s a good chance of avoiding that, but we are taking a belt and braces approach.”
A total of 6,536 people have been tested in the UK, of which 6,527 were confirmed negative and nine positive. There are also four confirmed cases from the Diamond Princess cruise ship who arrived in the UK from Japan.

About 80% of people with coronavirus experience only mild symptoms, and children do not seem to be affected, except in a small number of cases, according to the health secretary.
China has reported 77,658 cases and 2,663 deaths. Reports from Seoul in South Korea say 893 have been infected. Italy has 229 cases and seven deaths.
The shadow health secretary, Jonathan Ashworth, told Sky News: “We are all worried. We shouldn’t panic but this is extremely serious. It’s not yet a pandemic … but clearly it is hugely serious and we have to be alert, we have to act.
“I’m not going to criticise or throw stones at the government. Broadly they’ve taken the correct approach. We know the amount of pressure our NHS is under at the moment – intense strain after years of cuts. If this hits us very badly, there are questions about whether our NHS has the resources to cope.”


Topics



Coronavirus outbreak






Italy




Health




NHS




Europe




Infectious diseases




news






Share on Facebook






Share on Twitter






Share via Email






Share on LinkedIn






Share on Pinterest






Share on WhatsApp






Share on Messenger








Reuse this content




 