Coronavirus latest 10 March: at a glance

Key developments in the global coronavirus outbreak:
Italy lockdown comes into force
All Italians must stay at home and avoid all non-essential travel after quarantine measures were extended to the whole country to stop the spread of the coronavirus. A decree signed on Monday night, and in force until 3 April, means:
Travel is allowed only for “urgent, verifiable work situations and emergencies or health reasons”; companies have been asked to put workers on leave
Anyone with Covid-19 cannot leave their homes for any reason
All gatherings in public places are banned and all sports events are cancelled (including Serie-A)
Supermarkets remain open, but large shopping centres will close; bars can operate 6am-6pm, if people stay one metre apart
Schools and universities are closed, and all exams cancelled.
Italy has more than 9,000 confirmed cases and more than 460 people have died.
Xi Jinping visits city where virus began
The Chinese president has arrived in Wuhan for the first time since the outbreak began. It’s being seen as a signal that the Chinese leadership believes its fight against the epidemic is largely won. On Tuesday he’s expected to meet medical workers, soldiers, community staff, grassroots and local party officials, as well as patients and residents. Xi was notably absent from public view during the height of the outbreak, instead sending his deputy Li Keqiang to the city. On Tuesday China reported just 19 new cases of the virus (all in Hubei province), and 17 deaths (all in Wuhan).
Donald Trump pledges more testing and hints at aid for workers
The US president has promised to alleviate concerns over the spread of the virus and its potential economic impact in the US, after a terrible day on the Dow Jones, which closed down 7.8% (London’s FSTSE100 dropped 7.7%). He said he would ask Congress to pass payroll tax relief and that he was seeking help for hourly-wage workers to ensure they’re “not going to miss a paycheck” and “don’t get penalised for something that’s not their fault”. More than 500 cases have been diagnosed in 35 states. It emerged that at least two members of Congress with whom Trump has recently been in close contact were in self-quarantine because they were in contact with a known carrier of the virus. One of the congressmen greeted Trump with a handshake at an airport on Friday.
Asian markets rally on Trump aid plan
Asian markets rallied slightly on Tuesday in the wake of the US proposed economic measures. Australia’s stock market finished the day up 3%, having fallen 7.3% on Monday. All eyes will now be on what Australia’s government decides to include in its stimulus package, due out as soon as Wednesday. After record global falls on Monday, Singapore was up 1%, as was Bangkok, and Japan was up just under 1%. Oil also rose 8% on Tuesday after the biggest one-day rout in nearly 30 years – Brent crude futures rose by $2.85, or 8.3%, to $37.21.
South Korea reports fewer cases of virus
South Korea on Tuesday reported fewer than 150 new cases for the first time in two weeks. A total of 131 infections were confirmed on Monday, the Korea Centers for Disease Control and Prevention said. Three more people died, it added, taking the death toll to 54. Monday’s final figure marked the fourth consecutive daily fall and was the lowest for a single day since late February.
Cruise ship with infected passengers docks in California
The first people on a cruise ship carrying 3,500 people, 21 of whom have tested positive for Covid-19, began disembarking after the ship docked in the port of Oakland, California, on Monday. US passengers will be transported to military bases in California, Texas and Georgia, where they will be tested for the new coronavirus and remain under a 14-day quarantine. The US state department is working with the home countries of several hundred international passengers to arrange their repatriation.


Topics



Coronavirus outbreak




Coronavirus: at a glance






Italy




Europe




Infectious diseases




news






Share on Facebook






Share on Twitter






Share via Email






Share on LinkedIn






Share on Pinterest






Share on WhatsApp






Share on Messenger








Reuse this content




 