Tourism industry calls for coronavirus support in addition to bushfire package

The tourism sector and state ministers are concerned the federal government has no plans to increase a $76m tourism package set up to help regions affected by bushfires to cover businesses hit by the coronavirus outbreak.
As the government prepares to release a multifaceted stimulus package to avoid a looming recession, tourism operators are calling for the government to urgently boost financial support for the sector.
A key demand has been for the federal government to double the fund announced in the wake of the bushfire crisis to address the “unprecedented” hit to the industry.
But the agenda paper of Friday’s trade, tourism and investment ministers’ meeting, obtained by Guardian Australia, suggests the existing $76m fund will not be increased.



Australian government stimulus package to protect economy from coronavirus impact expected within days







Read more





The call from the tourism sector comes as the prime minister, Scott Morrison, announced on Thursday the government would extend the travel ban for China and Iran, and extend it to South Korea, while imposing additional screening measures on passengers arriving from Italy.
The tourism industry formally put the request to the government earlier this month, warning that one month’s effective closure of the Chinese tourist market amounted to more than $1bn in lost tourist spending.
Under the heading “Rebuilding Australian Tourism and responding to Covid-19”, the government agenda for Friday’s meeting states that the $76m package “developed in response to the bushfires will also assist businesses impacted by the coronavirus”.
It says the package was set up to “protect jobs, small business and local economies by helping get tourists travelling across Australia again”.
Guardian Australia understands that state tourism ministers have already discussed their concerns about the lack of extra funding detailed in the agenda, and will be pushing the tourism minister, Simon Birmingham, in Friday’s meeting to try to secure extra support.
Birmingham said the government was “constantly adjusting and refining the message, timing and targets” for both the $76m funding boost and the $154m tourism marketing budget.
“As the prime minister has made clear, more help is on the way as we carefully plan further responses to this crisis that are carefully targeted to help those most affected, seeking to save businesses and jobs,” Birmingham said.
He urged Australians to maintain confidence and travel domestically, saying every possible step had been taken to keep people safe.
The government is expected to unveil a stimulus package early next week, which will include immediate support for affected businesses including tax relief and a likely business investment allowance.
Labor’s shadow treasurer, Jim Chalmers, said the opposition wanted to be constructive and support the government package, but also wanted to ensure it was “substantial”.
“We will want to know that we are getting maximum bang for buck and that workers, businesses and communities are being supported,” Chalmers told ABC’s 7.30 on Thursday.



Coronavirus is not the villain: Australia’s economy was already on a precipice | Richard Denniss







Read more





The package comes as the Treasury secretary, Steven Kennedy, revealed that the department was forecasting a 0.7% contraction in economic growth in the March quarter, equivalent to lost activity worth about $3.5bn.
The fall – which comprises 0.5% from the virus and 0.2% from the fires – would be the largest negative fall in quarterly growth this century, worse than the 0.5% fall in December 2008 recorded as the global financial crisis hit.
Kennedy said the estimate included the hit to the tourism and education sectors, and exchange rate factors, but had not included the cost of supply chain disruption.
If the June quarter also sees a contraction in growth, Australia will be in technical recession.
In parliament on Thursday, Morrison was asked if he could “guarantee that Australians will not suffer a recession under his government”.
“Mr Speaker, I can guarantee the Australian people that they will get the strong economic management they voted for,” Morrison said in response.
In Senate estimates, the Treasury official Meghan Quinn said the department was “not forecasting a recession for the Australian economy”, when asked if modelling had been done on this possibility.
The Australian Tourism Industry Council warned that jobs would be lost if more support was not forthcoming, saying 90% of tourism businesses were small businesses that employed fewer than five people.
“Crisis is an overused word, but we have operators who are going to go to the wall,” the council’s chief executive, Simon Westaway, told Guardian Australia.
He called on the federal government to give immediate tax relief to tourism operators and to charge Tourism Australia with a domestic focus – a function that had been stripped from the agency under Tony Abbott.
The Queensland Tourism Industry Council chief executive, Daniel Gschwind, said the government needed to provide matching funding to the previous bushfire response of $76m.
“The coronavirus is having a devastating impact on our businesses, our staff and our communities,” Gschwind said.


Topics



Coronavirus outbreak






Australian economy




Business




Scott Morrison




Simon Birmingham




Australian politics




Coalition




news






Share on Facebook






Share on Twitter






Share via Email






Share on LinkedIn






Share on Pinterest






Share on WhatsApp






Share on Messenger








Reuse this content




 