PM: workers with coronavirus will get sick pay from day one

Boris Johnson has promised sick pay from day one for all those with suspected coronavirus and hinted at further measures to stop gig economy workers losing pay if they need to self-isolate.
The prime minister said the government was changing the rules to make sure statutory sick pay was temporarily available from the first day off sick instead of the fourth day.
The new policy will not help self-employed or gig economy workers, who may have to choose between losing pay during quarantine periods or carrying on with coronavirus symptoms .
But Johnson hinted at further possible measures that would go beyond the current advice that workers with no sick pay can claim universal credit.
Speaking at prime minister’s questions, he said: “We will take every step we can to make sure that … no one whether employed or self-employed – whatever the status of their employment – is penalised for doing the right thing.”
map
He said Rishi Sunak, the chancellor, would be leading on how this would work, following calls from all the major unions to deal with the problem to help gig economy workers who cannot afford to take time off sick.
It comes after Prof Chris Whitty, the chief medical officer, said the coronavirus was likely to be spreading undetected in the UK already, with health officials on the brink of moving into the phase of “delaying” rather than trying to “contain” transmission.
Whitty, who is helping to lead the government’s response, said it was “likely, not definite, that we will move on to onward transmission and an epidemic here in the UK”.
Speaking on BBC Radio 4’s Today programme, Whitty said the UK was almost in the second phase of the government’s strategy of trying to contain, delay, research and mitigate the virus.
“When I was here previously, we were firmly in contain stage. Now I think we are on the borderline between containing and delaying. But many of the things you do to contain it also delay it.”
Whitty was pressed on whether the coronavirus was spreading freely in the UK, with patients contracting the virus from unidentified sources.
Q&A How can I protect myself and others from the coronavirus outbreak?  
 Show 
 Hide  
The World Health Organization is recommending that people take simple precautions to reduce exposure to and transmission of the coronavirus, for which there is no specific cure or vaccine.
The UN agency advises people to:
Frequently wash their hands with an alcohol-based hand rub or warm water and soap
Cover their mouth and nose with a flexed elbow or tissue when sneezing or coughing
Avoid close contact with anyone who has a fever or cough
Seek early medical help if they have a fever, cough and difficulty breathing, and share their travel history with healthcare providers
Many countries are now enforcing or recommending curfews or lockdowns. 
In the UK, NHS advice is that anyone with symptoms should stay at home for at least 7 days.
If you live with other people, they should stay at home for at least 14 days, to avoid spreading the infection outside the home.



Was this helpful?







Thank you for your feedback.

He said: “If someone has imported a case and they are isolated, that isn’t community transmission. Even if someone gets it who we know about having the disease and it happens to be passed on in the UK, that also isn’t. It’s when it’s going from person to person to person and we pick it up. That’s what we mean by community transmission. It is likely that will happen if not now then very soon … I think it is likely to be happening at the moment, not definite.”
Whitty gave his assessment as the government designated the coronavirus a notifiable disease, which means some companies will be able to seek insurance compensation for cancellations.
The move brings England into line with Scotland, Northern Ireland and Ireland, which have already added the coronavirus to their lists of notifiable diseases.
A spokesman for the Department of Health and Social Care said: “To mitigate the impact on businesses, we will register Covid-19 as a notifiable disease. This will help companies seek compensation through their insurance policies in the event of any cancellations they may have to make as a result of the spread of the virus.”
Mark Carney, the Bank of England governor, has also suggested that small firms could get cash boosts to help stay afloat.
The government released its coronavirus action plan on Tuesday, showing that sweeping new measures may be necessary if an epidemic occurs.
The Guardian revealed that police investigations into some homicides could be halted and 999 response times extended under contingency plans to help forces cope with a severe coronavirus outbreak.

Schools may be closed, public events cancelled and some doctors called in out of retirement, the government also said.
As the number of confirmed UK cases reached 51, officials said the worst-case scenario was that up to a fifth of the workforce could be off sick during the peak of a potential epidemic.
On Tuesday evening, tests on thousands of patients in hospital intensive care units were ordered by NHS England amid concerns about the possible spread of the virus among people with respiratory problems.
Twelve more people across England tested positive for coronavirus – the second-highest single-day increase in cases to date – with all thought to have contracted it abroad. Eight had recently travelled from Italy, while the others came from Germany, Singapore, Japan and Iran.


Topics



Coronavirus outbreak






Infectious diseases




Medical research




Microbiology




Health




Health policy




callout






Share on Facebook






Share on Twitter






Share via Email






Share on LinkedIn






Share on Pinterest






Share on WhatsApp






Share on Messenger








Reuse this content




 