Scott Morrison flags plan to safeguard Australian jobs amid coronavirus outbreak

A plan to “keep Australians in jobs” in sectors affected by coronavirus will be released by the government within weeks, amid fears the ripple effect of the illness could trigger a recession.
Ahead of a meeting of the Reserve Bank on Tuesday, where the central bank is expected to cut interest rates for the fourth time since June last year, the prime minister told parliament that the government would soon release a plan aimed at propping up affected businesses as it dealt with the economic hit of the health crisis.
“We will be focusing on ensuring that we keep Australians in jobs, we keep businesses in business, and we keep investment flowing during what will be a very challenging time for the Australian economy,” Scott Morrison said.
“It’s important that we understand that on the other side of this crisis, when the health issues are addressed, there will be a bounce-back, and our plan will be ensuring that Australian businesses and jobs and the economy bounce back strongly.”
The imminent release of a government-assistance package comes as economists predict a 25-basis-point cut to the cash rate on Tuesday, down from the record low of 0.75% set in October, while the Australian share market is pummelled in response to the virus outbreak.
The government has already flagged that any government support would be targeted and scalable, with tourism, education and trade exposed industries the most likely to receive support.



Coronavirus: first cases of community transmission confirmed in Australia







Read more





However, it has played down the likelihood of economy-wide stimulus, saying direct assistance is better suited to respond to the effect of the novel coronavirus.
Labor has called for a national plan to be urgently released to address the “concern and anxiety” in the community, saying the economic impact was being felt across Australia, particularly in the tourism, aquaculture, retail and education sectors.
“It’s not that hard to imagine the devastation of losing access to the Chinese seafood market during New Year celebrations, or tens of thousands of hotel room cancellations, or the impact of thousands of students missing the start of the first Australian semester,” Labor’s shadow treasurer, Jim Chalmers, said.
But he said the virus outbreak had exacerbated existing weaknesses in the economy which had been “obvious and unattended” for some time.
“Before the virus and the fires, economic growth had already deteriorated substantially to be well below trend and below budget forecasts too,” Chalmers said.
On Monday, Morrison met with the governor and the deputy governor of the Reserve Bank of Australia, along with the finance minister, Mathias Cormann, the treasurer, Josh Frydenberg, and other senior officials to talk through the impact of coronavirus on the economy.
“The impacts of this coronavirus economically, and the assessment of those impacts, are changing on a very frequent basis,” Morrison said.
Frydenberg said the government was grappling with “economic shocks that have been outside our control”, saying the economic impact of the coronavirus would be more significant than previous global virus outbreaks, including Sars and Mers.
“We are seeing, as a result of the spread of the coronavirus, disruption to international supply chains and disruption to international students and tourists coming to this country,” Frydenberg said. “Our fiscal response will be responsible, it will be considered and it will be targeted … “focusing on ensuring that businesses and those affected are stronger when they come out of this crisis.”



What happens if coronavirus spreads in Australia?







Read more





The trade minister, Simon Birmingham, has also been meeting with affected industries, including the seafood sector, as the government formulates its assistance package.
The attorney general, Christian Porter, told parliament that the government could call on its powers to declare “human health-response zones” if the virus continued to spread. It was this power that was used to quarantine people on Christmas Island who had been evacuated from Wuhan in China, and in Howard Springs in the Northern Territory who had been evacuated from the Diamond Princess cruise ship in Japan.
“This is a power that can be used for either localised disease outbreaks in Australia or indeed to restrict individuals from attending places where a large number of people may otherwise choose to gather, such as shopping centres, schools or work,” Porter said.
“These are challenging times going forward, and these will be some of the first times that these important powers may be used.”


Topics



Coronavirus outbreak






Australian politics




Australian economy




news






Share on Facebook






Share on Twitter






Share via Email






Share on LinkedIn






Share on Pinterest






Share on WhatsApp






Share on Messenger








Reuse this content




 