UK government vows to accelerate coronavirus testing

The UK government has promised to ramp up testing of suspected coronavirus cases, although the measures still fall significantly short of the levels called for by the World Health Organization (WHO).
England’s chief medical officer, Prof Chris Whitty, defended the government’s approach to testing but said it intended to scale it up, noting that efforts were already “substantial” and that more than 44,000 tests had been conducted.
The move comes after the head of the WHO launched a strongly worded attack on governments that had neglected or held back testing, warning that they could not fight the pandemic blindfolded.
Dr Tedros Adhanom Ghebreyesus said: “We have not seen an urgent enough escalation in testing, isolation and contact tracing, which is the backbone of the response. And to do that, you must test and isolate. You cannot fight the fire blindfolded. And we cannot stop this pandemic, if we don’t know who is infected.
“We have a simple message for all countries Test, test, test. Test every suspected case.” He said the most effective way to prevent infections and save lives was “breaking the chains of transmission”.



Coronavirus UK cases: how many are in your area?







Read more





Whitty said the government agreed with the WHO and that it was giving up testing based on geography. He defended the testing regime, saying there was “complete surveillance” testing in intensive care, and that hospitals were also testing patients with pneumonia. He added that GPs were testing in the community.
Witty said the government would be “scaling it up” its efforts amid the concerns that not enough people were being screened. 
At the moment, tests were only useful for people who were currently sick, he said, but future tests would be “transformational” if there was a way to find out whether people had previously had it. That would show what proportion of people could get the disease without any symptoms, he said, adding that Public Health England was “rapidly” developing such a test.
While the UK has carried out about 44,000 tests, South Korea had by Saturday tested more than 248,647 people – one in every 200 citizens – and Italy 86,011, including anyone who might have been exposed to the virus, as well as those with symptoms.
In the UK, testing has mainly been carried out on those admitted to hospital, a move that has been criticised by experts and health professionals. 
Anthony Costello, a UK paediatrician and former director of the WHO, said he had personally written to Whitty, saying more tests needed to be done to see who had the virus.
Concern has also been raised about health professionals who are likely to be treating those with the virus but will only be tested if they are admitted to hospital. Thousands of people have signed a petition for doctors and nurses in the UK to be tested for coronavirus if they show symptoms.
Quick guide What to do if you have coronavirus symptoms in the UK  
 Show 
 Hide  

Symptoms are defined as either:
a high temperature - you feel hot to touch on your chest or back
a new continuous cough - this means you've started coughing repeatedly
NHS advice is that anyone with symptoms should stay at home for at least 7 days.
If you live with other people, they should stay at home for at least 14 days, to avoid spreading the infection outside the home.
After 14 days, anyone you live with who does not have symptoms can return to their normal routine. But, if anyone in your home gets symptoms, they should stay at home for 7 days from the day their symptoms start. Even if it means they're at home for longer than 14 days.
Information: If you live with someone who is 70 or over, has a long-term condition, is pregnant or has a weakened immune system, try to find somewhere else for them to stay for 14 days.
If you have to stay at home together, try to keep away from each other as much as possible.
After 7 days, if you no longer have a high temperature you can return to your normal routine.
If you still have a high temperature, stay at home until your temperature returns to normal.
If you still have a cough after 7 days, but your temperature is normal, you do not need to continue staying at home. A cough can last for several weeks after the infection has gone.
Source: NHS England on 18 March 2020




Was this helpful?







Thank you for your feedback.

Writing in the petition, shared widely online, Rebecca McCauley said: “I’m a junior doctor currently working in an emergency assessment unit. My cough is minor, and it’s March, so quite common to get a cough … but how do I know it’s not Covid?
“The truth is, I don’t. So now I have to ask … do I stay off work for seven days, leaving a shortfall of staff and putting further strain on the already strained NHS, when the likelihood is that I don’t actually have Covid-19? Or, do I go to work with my minor cough (as I would normally) and risk potentially spreading Covid-19 to all of the sicker patients I see on a daily basis?”
She added: “Ask yourself this: if your loved one needs hospital care for a condition not related to Covid-19, would you want them to be treated by staff who are likely infected with it? If not, please help us out here.”



Tell us: have you been affected by the coronavirus?







Read more





The petition, which calls for the prioritisation of testing for NHS staff, has had more than 15,000 signatures of support.
One nurse, speaking on condition of anonymity, told the Guardian the debate about testing was causing great concern among health workers. She said: “I have just had a cold, and it could be coronavirus. I feel worried about at-risk people in my family, I’ve had to keep kids off school, and it’s affecting my earnings. I said to my trust, ‘Can I come in to a mobile screening unit and be screened?’ I was told no as it is not Public Health England guidance – they are not swabbing staff. But I have been in contact with patients who have tested positive for coronavirus.”


Topics



Coronavirus outbreak






Health




Infectious diseases




Medical research




news






Share on Facebook






Share on Twitter






Share via Email






Share on LinkedIn






Share on Pinterest






Share on WhatsApp






Share on Messenger








Reuse this content




 