Coronavirus: could the US government's quarantine and travel ban backfire?

The US government’s broad travel ban and quarantine of nearly 200 people in California in response to the coronavirus has raised concerns from public health experts who warn that the aggressive strategy could backfire.
The Trump administration’s decision to severely restrict travel from China to the US and to implement a mass quarantine, the first in the US in more than 50 years, could be an overreaction that causes unnecessary fear and weakens the global response, according to some legal scholars and health professionals. Although there is generally support for cautious policies to stop the spread of the virus, experts said they were worried the harsh approaches could waste limited resources on potentially ineffective tactics, needlessly limit civil liberties and even cause more harm than good.



Coronavirus: 11 cases in US after California couple diagnosed with illness







Read more





“We should do the utmost to protect public health,” said Jennifer Nuzzo, the senior scholar at the Johns Hopkins Center for Health Security. “But we have to make sure the measures we’re implementing aren’t worse than the virus itself.”
The US Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC) announced on Friday that 195 Americans who were evacuated from Wuhan, China, would be placed under a required 14-day quarantine at the March air reserve base in Riverside, 60 miles east of Los Angeles. Trump also signed an order temporarily barring entry of foreign nationals who have traveled to China within the previous two weeks, making exceptions for immediate family of US citizens and permanent residents.
Trump administration officials said the drastic steps were necessary, days after the first known case in America was reported. The new strain of the coronavirus has killed more than 400 people in China, with the number of confirmed cases surpassing 20,000 this week. There were 11 confirmed cases in the US as of Monday. 



We have to make sure the measures we’re implementing aren’t worse than the virus itself
Jennifer Nuzzo

But several experts told the Guardian the restrictive policies could spread more fear and could inhibit the government’s response in the event of a large-scale outbreak.
“I worry that what we’re seeing is more showboating and a quarantine to look tough,” said Wendy Parmet, a Northeastern University law professor and health policy expert. “Quarantines and travel bans have a really, really ugly history. Everyone always wants to do it when people are scared. But the downsides are high and the risks are high.”
While the US has isolated sick individuals over the years, this marked the first federal quarantine since a 1960s effort to stop the spread of smallpox. There are no confirmed cases among the 195 individuals isolated in Riverside, according to authorities, who have noted that there have been reports of person-to-person transmission in the US and that there is evidence the virus can spread from people not showing symptoms.
A quarantine can be counterproductive if it appears to be overly strict and broad and diminishes the public’s trust in authorities, said Parmet, noting the general health principle is that government should use the “least restrictive” options available: “Don’t limit people’s rights and liberty to a greater extent than is necessary.”
Some of the most egregious quarantines in recent US history have promoted xenophobia and racism without legitimate public health justifications, such as the detention of HIV-positive Haitian refugees in the 1990s, Parmet said.
The US initially established a three-day hold for the travelers from Wuhan arriving to California, but later replaced it with the mandatory two-week quarantine. Nuzzo said the policy change seemed to be hastily implemented, raising concerns that political pressures were motivating the decision.
When the public is anxious about getting caught in quarantines or affected by travel bans, it can lead some to try to evade them, which can make it harder to stop the spread and can stifle officials’ ability to learn about the disease, added Nuzzo: “Anytime we take actions that appear as though we are criminalizing disease … we have to worry that we’re going to drive cases underground. We have to worry about people not being honest about their exposures.”


 
 

 
 Facebook 
 
 Twitter 
 
 Pinterest 


 Passengers arrive on an aircraft chartered by the US state department to evacuate government employees and the Chinese city of Wuhan. Photograph: Mike Blake/Reuters
The Trump administration’s intensifying immigration enforcement actions, widespread deportations and long-term detention, could pose a similar problem if the coronavirus outbreak escalates. Undocumented people and other non-citizens are less likely to seek medical help or be truthful with government authorities if there is fear that they or their loved ones could face immigration consequences, said Parmet.
“We should hear right now that there is protection, that nobody will be deported,” she said. “But we’re not hearing that. A quarantine in conjunction with an environment that feels threatening and unsafe to people can be counterproductive. People need to feel comfortable and have trust in health authorities.”
Arthur Caplan, a New York University bioethics professor, said US officials would have to work hard to ensure people that there would be amnesty and that they would not maintain records on them. There were, however, no indications that the government was prepared to work with undocumented people in the case of a major public health epidemic, he said: “If you have a huge number of people in the US afraid of deportation, they are just not going to present themselves.”
Nuzzo’s recent research on a mumps outbreak found that even some healthcare providers were reluctant to report individual cases among US farmworkers for fear that there could be immigration consequences. She said local health officials have to partner with organizations that are trusted in immigrant communities in the case of a public health crisis.
The CDC did not respond to questions about undocumented people or other inquiries about its coronavirus strategy.
Nuzzo said she was also concerned that the extensive travel restrictions could hinder the international travel of responders and flow of supplies and medicine: “Are we hurting ourselves more than the virus could?” She noted that the World Health Organization has advised against measures that “unnecessarily interfere with international travel and trade”.
Some experts have praised the overall US strategy so far. Robert Kim-Farley, a University of California, Los Angeles public health professor, said he hoped the quarantine would not cause panic but rather reassure the public that the US was adopting a robust response: “It’s a measure that’s being taken out of what I would consider an abundance of caution.”
Lawrence Gostin, a public health law expert at Georgetown University, also agreed that the 14-day quarantine was reasonable. But he said he was deeply concerned about the travel ban, noting that there was no evidence these kinds of restrictions carry any benefit, but that there was evidence to suggest it can be harmful by interfering with humanitarian work: “It’s a gratuitous and highly political response.”
Brandon Brown, an epidemiologist at the University of California, Riverside campus, who lives near the quarantine site, said there was a lot of fear in the local community about the coronavirus and that people were relieved to learn of the quarantine. He said he expected people within the quarantine were probably eager to be cautious as well and not risk infecting loved ones: “The main goal of everyone on the plane is to make sure they are not sick … and after 14 days, you get to go home.”


Topics



California






Coronavirus outbreak




Infectious diseases




news






Share on Facebook






Share on Twitter






Share via Email






Share on LinkedIn






Share on Pinterest






Share on WhatsApp






Share on Messenger








Reuse this content




 